              Ability
              ZARENA ASLAMI
              I   N Charlotte Brontë’s Villette (1853), our narrator Lucy Snowe, an
                  English teacher in a Belgian boarding school, is forced to spend a two-
              month vacation at her workplace caring for a student with severe disabilities:
              “the house was left quite empty, but for me, a servant, and a poor deformed
              and imbecile pupil, a sort of crétin, whom her stepmother in a distant prov-
              ince would not allow to return home.”1 This description is faintly compas-
              sionate, figuring the student as innocent victim within a fairy tale. Exiled
              by a wicked stepmother, the student is, like Lucy, bereft of family and friends.
              Lucy continues calmly, “The crétin did not seem unhappy. I did my best to
              feed her well and keep her warm, and she only asked food and sunshine, or
              when that lacked, fire.”2 But, as Paul Marchbanks points out, Lucy’s tone
              abruptly shifts after Lucy describes a bout with psychic anguish. During
              this episode, an older female relative of the student appears: “It was some
              relief when an aunt of the crétin, a kind old woman, came one day, and
              took away my strange deformed companion.”3 Now that the student has
              been enfolded in a kinship relation, she becomes the object of the narrator’s
              revulsion: “The hapless creature had been at times a heavy charge . . . I could
              not leave her a minute alone: for her poor mind, like her body, was warped:
              its propensity was to evil. A vague bent to mischief, an aimless malevolence,
              made constant vigilance indispensable.”4 Lucy endows the student with an
              intent to harm, an intent that she interprets as random (because what
              would it mean to imagine that the student wants to harm her for a particular
              reason?). This shift is followed by yet another that deprives the student of
              even this immoral agency, rendering her animal: “As she very rarely spoke,
              and would sit for hours together moping and mowing, and distorting her fea-
              tures with indescribable grimaces, it was more like being prisoned with some
              strange tameless animal, than associating with a human being.”5 Lucy con-
              cludes by referring to the revolting bodily care she was inappropriately
              assigned: “These duties should not have fallen on me; a servant, now absent,
              had rendered them hitherto.”6
                      This passage brings up several tensions surrounding the term “abil-
              ity.” Certainly, Lucy’s ability—economically, physically, intellectually,
              morally, and narratively—depends upon the positing of subjects with
              lesser ability around her. But are there other ways to think about ability
              Victorian Literature and Culture, Vol. 46, No. 3/4, pp. 551–950.
              © Cambridge University Press 2018.
              doi:10.1017/S1060150318000219
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:38:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000219

                    552          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    in the rich context this passage provides? Here, I would like to point to
                    the tendency to focus on the physical rather than intellectual in disability
                    studies and then turn to recent critiques that set considerations of
                    debility alongside the antinormativist work of disability studies. I am
                    guided by two questions: How are the physically disabled seen as recuper-
                    able and thus human within a liberal capitalist logic, while the intellectu-
                    ally disabled are not? And how might a focus on structural processes of
                    debility enrich our understanding of the Victorian period?
                            Fiona Kumari Campbell in her entry on “ability” in another
                    Raymond-Williams-inspired project, Keywords for Disability Studies, charts
                    changes in its meaning from Aristotelian notions of “‘monstrous’ bodies
                    as natural anomalia . . . that represented different types of ‘ability,’” through
                    the medieval period, when it began to be used in a more exclusive, legal
                    sense to limit access to inheritance and rights, to the early modern
                    period, when it began to describe bodily health.7 It was not until the
                    Enlightenment, with its promotion of reason and self-development, that
                    ability and disability began to appear in binary relation. During the indus-
                    trial age, utilitarian thinking reconceptualized ability from a personal char-
                    acteristic to a measurable quality of a specific population “capable of selling
                    their labor.”8 The nineteenth century in Western Europe thus linked abil-
                    ity and economic productivity, a fusion that our neoliberal present has not
                    only inherited, but also globalized and accelerated.
                            Martha Stoddard Holmes makes a similar point in Fictions of
                    Affliction: Physical Disability in Victorian Culture. Her study traces the insta-
                    bilities in Victorian conceptions of the deserving and undeserving poor
                    as they applied to the figures of “the innocent afflicted child and the beg-
                    ging imposter.”9 Both were defined by their exclusion from the economic
                    realm: nonproductive, they were affect-generating objects of compassion
                    and derision, respectively. Meanwhile, Rosemarie Garland Thomson in
                    Extraordinary Bodies: Figuring Physical Disability in American Culture and
                    Literature argues that the figure of the physically disabled threatened
                    the idea of the monadic liberal individual that undergirds U. S. notions
                    of democratic citizenship, “mock[ing] the notion of the body as
                    compliant instrument of the limitless will.”10
                            Both Holmes’s and Thomson’s groundbreaking works set Victorian
                    ability within liberal discourses and chart disability’s distance from those
                    norms. As their subtitles indicate, they also focus on the physical. Licia
                    Carlson and Christopher Krentz have noted that disability studies tends
                    to ignore or malign intellectual disabilities.11 I do not think that is the
                    case with these two works, but it is striking how few Victorianist studies
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:38:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000219

                                                                                                                ABILITY             553
              analyze intellectual disability (for notable exceptions, see Marchbanks and
              McDonagh).12 Can we relate this to another set of concerns that have
              emerged in critical theory? I am thinking of the shift from analyzing the cul-
              tural representation of disability to analyzing the structural conditions that
              produce disability or, as Jasbir K. Puar has put it, debility.13 Drawing on
              Lauren Berlant’s notion of slow death, Puar’s concept of the right to
              maim examines how states deploy biopolitical practices to produce unde-
              sirable parts of the population as disabled. In this framework, debility in
              the neoliberal age is a process that accompanies racialization and the bru-
              talities of finance capitalism. It opposes but constitutes the idea of disabil-
              ity, understood as a privileged identity available only to white, middle-class
              subjects. Disability can emerge because debility is being obscured.
                      Villette is interesting for the ways that it narrates an intense affective
              transfer between the disabled student and Lucy, suggesting something
              like what Anna Hickey-Moody calls “slow life,” “a slow temporal ecology
              of sensory aesthetics that is posited by cultures of intellectual disability,”
              which she argues offers a materialist critique of the processes that
              produce what Berlant terms slow death.14 But if we are interested in histor-
              icizing ability in relation to disciplinary power and biopolitics, we might
              want to turn to the two ghosted characters in the Villette passage: the ser-
              vants. When M. Paul later observes to Lucy that she was alone over vaca-
              tion, Lucy corrects him, “‘Not quite alone: Marie Broc’ (the crétin) ‘was
              with me.’”15 She names the student for the first time, but disappears the
              servant who was also there. The second invisible servant is Marie’s care-
              taker, whose presence is invoked by her holiday absence, which has caused
              Lucy to have to care for Marie’s bodily functions. Lucy explicitly disavows
              this labor as not hers; her proper work is to teach the neurotypical daugh-
              ters of the Belgian bourgeoisie and gentry to speak English. As Puar notes,
              caretakers of the disabled are often themselves debilitated. There is more
              to say than I have room, but as we continue to explore Victorian ability, we
              might begin to think about how physical and intellectual disabilities are
              opposed and set within scales of economic productivity and to track how
              industrialism, free market ideology, and empire debilitated and racialized
              working-class and colonized populations.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. Charlotte Brontë, Villette (1853; New York: Houghton Mifflin
                     Company, 1971), 134.
                2. Brontë, Villette, 135.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:38:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000219

                    554          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       3. Brontë, Villette, 135; Paul Marchbanks, “A Costly Morality: Dependency
                            Care and Mental Difference in the Novels of the Brontë Sisters,”
                            Journal of Literary & Cultural Disability Studies 4, no. 1 (2010): 55–71.
                       4. Brontë, Villette, 136.
                       5. Brontë, Villette, 136.
                       6. Brontë, Villette, 136.
                       7. Fiona Kumari Campbell, “Ability,” in Keywords for Disability Studies, ed.
                            Rachel Adams, Benjamin Reiss, and David Serlin (New York:
                            New York University Press, 2015), 12.
                       8. Campbell, “Ability,” 13.
                       9. Martha Stoddard Holmes, Fictions of Affliction: Physical Disability in
                            Victorian Culture (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2004), 95.
                    10. Rosemarie Garland Thomson, Extraordinary Bodies: Figuring Physical
                            Disability in American Culture and Literature (New York: Columbia
                            University Press, 1997), 43.
                    11. Christopher Krentz, “A ‘Vacant Receptacle’? Blind Tom, Cognitive
                            Difference, and Pedagogy,” PMLA 120, no. 2 (2005): 552–56; Licia
                            Carlson, “Feminist Approaches to Cognitive Disability,” Philosophy
                            Compass 11, no. 10 (2016): 541–53.
                    12. Patrick McDonagh, Idiocy: A Cultural History (Liverpool: Liverpool
                            University Press, 2008).
                    13. Jasbir K. Puar, The Right to Maim: Debility, Capacity, Disability (Durham:
                            Duke University Press, 2017).
                    14. Anna Hickey-Moody, “Slow Life and Ecologies of Sensation,” Feminist
                            Review 111 (2015): 140–48, 140; Lauren Berlant, “Slow Death
                            (Sovereignty, Obesity, Lateral Agency),” Critical Inquiry 33 (Summer
                            2007): 754–80.
                    15. Brontë, Villette, 174.
                    Aestheticism
                    JOSEPH BRISTOW
                    O         NE of the curious aspects of the term aestheticism is that it has
                              succeeded—particularly since the 1990s—in defining a thriving
                    area of English literary history that, for reasons that require some
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:38:40, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000219

