                                                                                                        AESTHETICS                  559
              Aesthetics
              BENJAMIN MORGAN
              AESTHETICS was the bad object for a surprising diversity of critical
                      traditions in the 1970s and 1980s. Poststructuralists, sociologists,
              and Marxists all argued that the Enlightenment notion of aesthetic
              judgment as transhistorically detached from contingency, praxis, and
              ethics was an expression of bourgeois ideology.1 Theodor Adorno’s
              dialectical Aesthetic Theory (1970) discerned antinomies rather than
              pure ideology. The idea of the aesthetic as an autonomous realm of use-
              less activity was surely indefensible from the perspective of historical
              materialism—but this very idea of aesthetic autonomy refused what
              Adorno called the “total exchange society” and what we today call neolib-
              eralism.2 More recently, the tables have turned; critiques of these cri-
              tiques have given rise to a return to form or to “new formalism,” to a
              burgeoning interest in the affective dimensions of aesthetic experience,
              and to “neuroaesthetics” as a possible interface of the humanities and the
              hard sciences. But a shared feature of the critique of and return to aes-
              thetics is that the foundational touchstones are assumed to be German
              idealism and romanticism, from Alexander Baumgarten to Friedrich
              Schlegel.
                      From this perspective, Victorian Britain looks like a philosophical
              backwater: no Kants or Hegels here; just the pious essays of John Ruskin
              or the campy effusions of teapot-loving aesthetes. Terry Eagleton asserts
              outright that “much in the Anglophone [aesthetic] tradition is in fact
              derivative of German philosophy.”3 It is true that aesthetic philosophy
              was often viewed and eschewed by Victorians as a Teutonic invention.
              But we misunderstand the history of aesthetic thought if we disregard its
              intellectual life in British nineteenth century. Two intersecting threads
              of Victorian aesthetics challenge the assumptions of critiques and defenses
              of the aesthetic in critical theory. The first is an openness to the possibility
              of scientific rather than philosophical explanations of aesthetic
              experience. The second is an interest in corporeality and materiality, as
              distinct from abstract, disembodied cognition. These strands intersect in
              that embodied cognition first becomes an object of scientific knowledge
              in the Victorian period, and this is a hint as to what is most distinctive
              and important about Victorian aesthetics.
                      First: aesthetics as a science. The empirical study of aesthetic experi-
              ence was mostly rejected by German idealists and romantics but
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000232

                    560          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    flourished in Victorian Britain. The possibility of a science of beauty was
                    foreshadowed by design and color theory early in the century, as figures
                    like the paint manufacturer George Field and the interior designer David
                    Ramsay Hay revived ancient Greek attempts to discover a unified, math-
                    ematical model of harmonies of color, form, and human proportion. At
                    the same time, disciplines were shifting and professionalizing. Physiology
                    and biology claimed the human mind as one of their knowledge objects,
                    and, along with it, questions about the sense of beauty that had previ-
                    ously been in the possession of philosophy. Grant Allen’s Physiological
                    Aesthetics (1877), one of the only British works on aesthetics widely
                    read in Europe, synthesized Alexander Bain’s physiological psychology
                    and Herbert Spencer’s evolutionary theory to theorize aesthetic
                    response as an evolved animal behavior rooted in the nervous system.4
                    The professional and romantic couple Vernon Lee and Clementina
                    Anstruther-Thomson later used empirical introspection, quantitative
                    analysis, and statistical surveys to study empathy, understood by them as
                    a “bodily alteration” directly induced by visual, verbal, or musical
                    form.5 By the turn of the twentieth century, the first experimental psy-
                    chology laboratories in the U. K., the U. S., and Canada included studies
                    of aesthetic experience in their research programs.6
                            This attention to the body as a receptor of aesthetic stimuli draws
                    our attention to a second distinguishing feature of Victorian aesthetic
                    thought: the importance of corporeality and materiality. Perhaps no
                    intervention in aesthetic philosophy is more significant or controversial
                    than Kant’s distinction between aesthetic judgment and sensuous plea-
                    sure: only judgments untainted by bodily gratification can truly be called
                    aesthetic. Adorno acerbically describes Kant’s idea of aesthetic pleasure
                    as “castrated hedonism, desire without desire.”7 One might imagine
                    that the Victorians would wholly embrace “desire without desires”—and
                    indeed, the young Ruskin did attempt to castrate hedonism, distinguish-
                    ing “degraded” and “morbid” aesthesis (a merely sensory response) from
                    theoria, a sort of “reverent” and contemplative pleasure in beauty.8 But in
                    fact, Victorian writers and artists repeatedly emphasized the sensuous
                    materiality of aesthetic experience. In their painting and poetry,
                    Ruskin’s Pre-Raphaelite followers focused so much on the body that
                    they were viciously attacked by Robert Buchanan for embracing “fleshly
                    feeling.”9 William Morris’s socialist aestheticism placed at its center not
                    the judging mind but the laboring body. Poiesis was praxis: in a utopian
                    economy of unalienated labor, the making and using of art would both
                    exist for the “service of the body.”10
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000232

                                                                                                        AESTHETICS                  561
                      These materialisms—scientific, aesthetic, corporeal—resisted and
              transformed German idealism, reconfiguring the terrain of the aesthetic.
              They also reframe our usual understanding of aestheticism, Britain’s
              best-known contribution to the history of aesthetics. Aestheticism is some-
              times reduced to the slogan “art for art’s sake,” as though it were just a
              popularization of Kantian autonomy. But it was, instead, a devious reinter-
              pretation of continental traditions. Walter Pater’s The Renaissance, that holy
              book of aesthetes, is subtly and closely engaged with major figures of
              German aesthetic philosophy (Winckelmann, Goethe, Hegel, Schiller)—
              but it also repeatedly embraces empirical and scientific knowledge practices.
              The “Preface” invites readers to examine aesthetic impressions “as a chemist
              notes some natural element,” while the “Conclusion” describes the pursuit of
              “art for its own sake” as a pragmatic response to a scientific materialism that
              reduces consciousness to “the modification of the tissues of the brain.”11
              Oscar Wilde is most famous for repurposing Pater’s and Ruskin’s thought
              as the vehicle of mass-culture celebrity. But Wilde’s gambit was scientifically
              and philosophically informed: Lord Henry applies the “experimental
              method” to Dorian Gray in order to conduct a “scientific analysis of the pas-
              sions”; Winckelmannian queer Hellenism is Wilde’s strategy for destroying
              the distinction between aesthetic and erotic pleasure.12
                      This infusion of embodied pleasure and empiricist thought make it
              difficult to describe British aesthetics as simply derivative of German phi-
              losophy. It also suggests that the nineteenth century may have something
              to teach us about recent developments in aesthetic theory. Having moved
              beyond debates over whether or not the aesthetic is an obfuscating strat-
              egy of bourgeois ideology, many are now drawing attention to the inter-
              face of aesthetics with the neurosciences; to the possibility of quantifying
              the study of cultural objects; and to the affective embodiment of aesthetic
              judgments.13 Victorians thought deeply about scientific and embodied
              aspects of aesthetic experience that were ignored for much of the
              twentieth century but that have returned to us today. Their writing begins
              to look less like an epiphenomenon of idealist aesthetics, and more like
              an overlooked history of our critical present.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. Significant interventions include Terry Eagleton, The Ideology of the
                     Aesthetic (Cambridge: Blackwell, 1990); Paul De Man, Aesthetic
                     Ideology, ed. Andrzej Warminski (Minneapolis: University of
                     Minnesota Press, 1996); Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000232

                    562          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                            Critique of the Judgement of Taste, trans. Richard Nice (Cambridge:
                            Harvard University Press, 1984); Hal Foster, ed., The Anti-Aesthetic:
                            Essays on Postmodern Culture (Port Townsend: Bay Press, 1983).
                       2.   Theodor W. Adorno, Aesthetic Theory, ed. Gretel Adorno and Rolf
                            Tiedemann, trans. Robert Hullot-Kentor (Minneapolis: University
                            of Minnesota Press, 1997), 226.
                       3.   Eagleton, The Ideology of the Aesthetic, 11.
                       4.   See Benjamin Morgan, The Outward Mind: Materialist Aesthetics in
                            Victorian Science and Literature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
                            2017).
                       5.   Vernon Lee and Anstruther-Thomson, Beauty and Ugliness and Other
                            Studies in Psychological Aesthetics (London: John Lane, 1912), 167.
                       6.   See, for instance, the experiments described in August Kirschmann,
                            ed., University of Toronto Studies: Psychology Series, Vol. 1 (Toronto:
                            University of Toronto Press, 1900).
                       7.   Adorno, Aesthetic Theory, 11.
                       8.   John Ruskin, Modern Painters, Volume 2, ed. E. T. Cook and Alexander
                            Wedderburn, Library Edition, Vol. 4, The Works of John Ruskin
                            (London: George Allen, 1903), 35–36, 47.
                       9.   Robert Buchanan, “The Fleshly School of Poetry: Mr. D. G. Rossetti.”
                            The Contemporary Review 18 (August 1871): 334–50.
                    10.     William Morris, The Collected Works of William Morris: Signs of Change and
                            Lectures on Socialism, Vol. 23 (Longmans, Green, and Co., 1915), 165–66.
                    11.     Walter Pater, The Renaissance: Studies in Art and Poetry: The 1893 Text,
                            ed. Donald L. Hill (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980),
                            xiii, 190, 186.
                    12.     Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, in The Complete Works of Oscar
                            Wilde, Vol. 3, ed. Joseph Bristow and Ian Small (Oxford: Oxford
                            University Press, 2005), 219. On Winckelmann see Whitney Davis,
                            Queer Beauty: Sexuality and Aesthetics from Winckelmann to Freud and
                            Beyond (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010).
                    13.     See Sianne Ngai, Our Aesthetic Categories: Zany, Cute, Interesting
                            (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2012); Semir Zeki, Splendors and
                            Miseries of the Brain: Love, Creativity, and the Quest for Human Happiness
                            (Malden: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009); Gabrielle G. Starr, Feeling Beauty: The
                            Neuroscience of Aesthetic Experience (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2013).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000232

