                                                                                    A F F E C T, AN AC HRO N I S M                  567
                     affects without offering transformative potential. See Ngai, Ugly Feelings
                     (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2005); and Berlant. Even for
                     Kathleen Stewart, who evokes with great nuance an “ordinary affect”
                     that constitutes “a surging, a rubbing, a connection of some kind”
                     that makes “the world . . . still tentative, charged, overwhelming, and
                     alive,” nonetheless, “this is not a good thing or a bad thing”
                     (Ordinary Affects [Durham: Duke University Press, 2007], 128).
                9.   See Anderson, “Therapeutic Criticism,” 323.
              10.    Rachel Ablow, Victorian Pain (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
                     2017), 116. See also Benjamin Morgan, The Outward Mind: Materialist
                     Aesthetics in Victorian Science and Literature (Chicago: University of
                     Chicago Press, 2017); and Jesse Oak Taylor, The Sky of Our
                     Manufacture: The London Fog in British Fiction from Dickens to Woolf
                     (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2016).
              11.    See Caroline Levine, Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network
                     (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2015).
              12.    See Amanda Anderson, Bleak Liberalism (Chicago: University of
                     Chicago Press, 2016), which makes an argument about the
                     Victorian realist novel that resonates with Isobel Armstrong’s account
                     of the double poem in her Victorian Poetry: Poetry, Poetics, and Politics
                     (London: Routledge, 1996).
              Anachronism
              MARY L. MULLEN
              I   T is timely to be untimely these days. Anachronism, long understood as
                   an error to avoid, has become a key dimension of diverse historicist
              methods. Postcolonial and queer theorists, in particular, celebrate anach-
              ronism as a visible site of dislocation that calls what counts as timely and
              what constitutes history into question.1 Espousing what Bliss Cua Lim
              calls “temporal critique,” postcolonial theorists show that the homoge-
              nous, empty time upon which Western history depends relegates
              non-Western people and practices to a previous historical moment.2 In
              turn, queer theorists question the “straight time” of history—the way lin-
              ear time reinforces heteronormative patterns of development and
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000256

                    568          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    depends upon reproductive futurity.3 For both fields, embracing anach-
                    ronism becomes a way to rethink contemporaneity as untimely coexis-
                    tence and to claim lived relationships to the past that dominant forms
                    of historicism obscure.
                            While several Victorianist scholars have theorized the productive
                    potential of anachronisms, many scholars still associate Victorians with uni-
                    form, shared time that understands untimely irruptions as chronological
                    mistakes.4 Victorians, the story goes, sought to organize time, integrate social
                    difference, manage anachronisms. Take, for instance, Dipesh Chakrabarty,
                    who turns to John Stuart Mill to explain the forms of European historicism
                    that he critiques. For Chakrabarty, Mill’s sense of a shared developmental
                    path—a universal but uneven pattern of development—“consigned
                    Indians, Africans, and other ‘rude’ nations to an imaginary waiting room
                    of history.”5 Mill’s shared time, according to Chakrabarty, becomes a way
                    to measure supposed cultural backwardness. In turn, Lee Edelman draws
                    on Charles Dickens’s A Christmas Carol and George Eliot’s Silas Marner to
                    show reproductive futurism’s integrative force. According to Edelman,
                    these Victorian texts assimilate queer figures like Ebenezer Scrooge and
                    Silas Marner into communal forms through temporality. Their narratives
                    replace Scrooge and Marner’s anti-social pleasure in and from the past—
                    what Edelman calls “the closed economy of the backward gaze”—with the
                    normative social structure of futurity.6 Chakrabarty and Edelman suggest,
                    in quite different ways, that Victorian writers integrate social difference
                    into shared time in order to prevent the unruly possibilities of untimely ori-
                    entations, to close down alternative ways of being in the world.
                            But although the Victorian period was a time of temporal and histor-
                    ical standardization, it was also a time of anachronism. In fact, one of the
                    first stories of time travel, “An Anachronism, or Missing One’s Coach”
                    (1838), suggests that anachronism conceives of temporality as a mode
                    of relation that encourages social and historical difference rather than
                    a sequential order that disciplines and ultimately integrates this differ-
                    ence. “An Anachronism” is a story about radical historical discontinuity.
                    The narrative follows an antiquarian whose unease with the present leads
                    him to seek comfort in reflecting on the forgotten past and speculating
                    about the unknown future. He misses his coach, travels back in time, and
                    meets the venerable Bede, who asks him to describe the future (the anti-
                    quarian’s present). Although the antiquarian greets Bede’s “well-known
                    and smiling face” with familiarity and recognition, the story reveals that
                    they do not even share a language.7 Bede has never heard of Leeds,
                    does not understand what “printed” means, and fails to grasp the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000256

                                                                                                   A N AC HRO N I S M               569
              nineteenth-century man’s irony.8 More importantly, Bede cannot under-
              stand what the modern man means by “improvement.”9As the modern
              man describes the discovery of new continents, the expansion of the
              British empire, and the growing triumph of reason, he concludes that
              selfishness, ignorance, and poverty have actually increased. Over the
              course of their difficult conversation, the venerable Bede confronts a
              future that fills him with both wonder and horror.
                      Because their conversation defamiliarizes assumptions about history
              and progress, it also raises questions about the “anachronism” that the
              story’s title refers to. Does the antiquarian become an anachronism
              when he travels back to the “wildness of another age?”10 Or, is he an
              anachronism from the outset because he finds comfort in “retrospective
              or anticipative” thought but resents the intrusion of the present?11 Or is
              the venerable Bede the anachronism insofar as he appears in what was
              previously an 1837 landscape but cannot understand the stories of the
              present? I suggest that the story’s title introduces anachronism as a
              singular noun—“an anachronism”—only to resist locating anachronism
              in just one person or landscape to highlight how the encounter between
              times unsettles assumptions about shared time and continuous develop-
              ment. When the nineteenth century and the eighth century collide,
              there is no correct chronology and no easily identifiable historical
              error: time is out of joint. And, precisely because there is no proper chro-
              nology, the alterity of the past cannot be safely located in the past—it per-
              vades both the present and future.
                      Although anachronism is an explicit concept within this story, we do
              not need to turn to stories of time travel to see Victorians grappling with
              anachronism: it is a feature of canonical, metropolitan realist novels. Just
              think of Miss Havisham who dramatically stops her clocks in Great
              Expectations, Cranford’s old-fashioned Amazons, and George Eliot’s
              narrative movement between past and present, story and discourse. In
              Victorian novels, time is decidedly not uniform and certainly not shared.
              It is a mode of relation that highlights the discordance of the present
              moment and invites untimely forms of historicism.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. Also see Jacques Rancière, “The Concept of Anachronism and the
                     Historian’s Truth,” InPrint 3, no. 1 (2015): 13–48; Harry
                     Harootunian, “Remembering the Historical Present,” Critical
                     Inquiry 33, no. 3 (Spring 2007): 471–94.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000256

                    570          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       2. Bliss Cua Lim, Translating Time: Cinema, the Fantastic, and Temporal
                            Critique (Durham: Duke University Press, 2009), 12–13.
                       3. See, for instance, Elizabeth Freeman’s Time Binds: Queer Temporalities,
                            Queer Histories (Durham: Duke University Press, 2010) which con-
                            nects the “stubborn lingering of pastness” to queer affect, 8.
                       4. See Anne McClintock, Imperial Leather: Race, Gender and Sexuality in the
                            Colonial Context (New York: Routledge, 1995), 40; and Jay Clayton,
                            Charles Dickens in Cyberspace: The Afterlife of the Nineteenth Century in
                            Postmodern Culture (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), 113–15.
                       5. Dipesh Chakrabarty, Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and
                            Historical Difference (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), 8.
                       6. Lee Edelman, No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive (Durham:
                            Duke University Press, 2004), 53–54.
                       7. “An Anachronism; or, Missing One’s Coach,” Dublin University
                            Magazine 11, no. 66 (June 1838), 701–12, 705.
                       8. “An Anachronism,” 707.
                       9. “An Anachronism,” 709.
                    10. “An Anachronism,” 705.
                    11. “An Anachronism,” 702.
                    Animal
                    IVAN KREILKAMP
                              OW did the Victorians define and conceptualize the “animal”? The
                    H         term allowed—as it still does today—a strictly scientific definition,
                    along with a more loosely colloquial one. Richards Owens wrote in 1860
                    that “When an organism receives nutritive matter by a mouth, inhales oxy-
                    gen and exhales carbonic acid, and developes [sic] tissues, the proximate
                    principles of which are quaternary compounds of carbon, hydrogen, oxy-
                    gen, and nitrogen, it is called an ‘animal.’” But in his 1873 Talk of Animals
                    and Their Masters, Cambridge Apostle Arthur Helps specified, “When I use
                    the word ‘animals’ I mean all living creatures except men and women.”1
                            More than a simple slippage between scientific precision and idiomatic
                    flexibility, though, this difference points to a fundamental instability and mul-
                    tifariousness in the term. “Animal” is at once a biological category that
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000256

