                    570          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       2. Bliss Cua Lim, Translating Time: Cinema, the Fantastic, and Temporal
                            Critique (Durham: Duke University Press, 2009), 12–13.
                       3. See, for instance, Elizabeth Freeman’s Time Binds: Queer Temporalities,
                            Queer Histories (Durham: Duke University Press, 2010) which con-
                            nects the “stubborn lingering of pastness” to queer affect, 8.
                       4. See Anne McClintock, Imperial Leather: Race, Gender and Sexuality in the
                            Colonial Context (New York: Routledge, 1995), 40; and Jay Clayton,
                            Charles Dickens in Cyberspace: The Afterlife of the Nineteenth Century in
                            Postmodern Culture (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), 113–15.
                       5. Dipesh Chakrabarty, Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and
                            Historical Difference (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), 8.
                       6. Lee Edelman, No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive (Durham:
                            Duke University Press, 2004), 53–54.
                       7. “An Anachronism; or, Missing One’s Coach,” Dublin University
                            Magazine 11, no. 66 (June 1838), 701–12, 705.
                       8. “An Anachronism,” 707.
                       9. “An Anachronism,” 709.
                    10. “An Anachronism,” 705.
                    11. “An Anachronism,” 702.
                    Animal
                    IVAN KREILKAMP
                              OW did the Victorians define and conceptualize the “animal”? The
                    H         term allowed—as it still does today—a strictly scientific definition,
                    along with a more loosely colloquial one. Richards Owens wrote in 1860
                    that “When an organism receives nutritive matter by a mouth, inhales oxy-
                    gen and exhales carbonic acid, and developes [sic] tissues, the proximate
                    principles of which are quaternary compounds of carbon, hydrogen, oxy-
                    gen, and nitrogen, it is called an ‘animal.’” But in his 1873 Talk of Animals
                    and Their Masters, Cambridge Apostle Arthur Helps specified, “When I use
                    the word ‘animals’ I mean all living creatures except men and women.”1
                            More than a simple slippage between scientific precision and idiomatic
                    flexibility, though, this difference points to a fundamental instability and mul-
                    tifariousness in the term. “Animal” is at once a biological category that
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000268

                                                                                                                ANIMAL              571
              includes the human, and an ethico-political category that not only excludes
              the human, but that defines the human through that exclusion. Jacques
              Derrida argues that that the very term “animal” is at once a conceptual
              error, in its excessive generality—“They have given themselves the word in
              order to corral a large number of living beings within a single concept:
              ‘the Animal,’ they say”—but which is also foundational to the human:
              “Power over the animal is the essence of the ‘I’ or the ‘person,’ the essence
              of the human.”2 Beyond its strictly biological/scientific meaning, the term
              “animal” performs at least two different notable rhetorical acts, arguably vio-
              lent ones: it groups together all creatures that are not “human” into one single
              category; and it defines the human by virtue of its own exclusion from a cat-
              egory that otherwise would seem to have to include it. To be human, then, is
              to claim for oneself both the power to remove oneself from biological reality
              —to not be an animal, even when one actually is one—and the power to rule
              over and to oversee the realm of the non-human.
                      The domestication, care, and breeding of animals thus become
              charged with a special power—as practices that define and prove human-
              ness by asserting control over animals. As Charles Darwin writes in The
              Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication, “[I]t is not surprising
              that . . . our highly-bred pigeons have undergone an astonishing amount
              of change; for in regard to them there is no defined limit to the wish of
              the fancier, and there is no known limit to the variability of their characters.
              What is there to stop the fancier desiring to give to his Carrier a longer and
              longer beak, or to his Tumbler a shorter and shorter beak?”3 Darwin com-
              pares animal domestication to high fashion in its tendency to operate as a
              zone for unlimited “extremes” of creative whim. In breeding and domestica-
              tion, man shapes nature with all the unnatural artifice of a clothes designer:
                      It is an important principle that in the process of selection man almost invari-
                      ably wishes to go to an extreme point. Thus, there is no limit to his desire to
                      breed certain kinds of horses and dogs as fleet as possible, and others as strong
                      as possible; certain kinds of sheep for extreme fineness, and others for extreme
                      length of wool; and he wishes to produce fruit, grain, tubers, and other useful
                      parts of plants, as large and excellent as possible. With animals bred for amuse-
                      ment, the same principle is even more powerful; for fashion, as we see in our
                      dress, always runs to extremes.4
              The pigeon fancier will always have an urge to give his birds longer or
              shorter beaks—in part simply because in doing so, he proves that he him-
              self is “human,” non-animal, the animal who defies the category, inhab-
              iting and controlling a zone of the non-natural “artificial”.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000268

                    572          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                             But when thinking about the Victorians and animals, questions of
                    control and domination are only part of the story. Victorian personhood
                    also relies importantly on care and love for the animal—or for some ani-
                    mals. Deidre Lynch argues that in the late eighteenth century, literature,
                    “something to be taken personally by definition,” began to “deman[d]
                    love,” that a newly “subjectivity-saturated language of involvement and
                    affection” began to inflect readers’ relationship to literature.5 I suggest
                    that the love of literature and the love of pet animals become mutually
                    defining in this period. Victorian persons, and Victorian protagonists,
                    must prove their ability to sort out animals properly: to cast out most living
                    creatures as mere animals, as undeserving of any special care or notice, as
                    available for consumption as meat, hide, or other products; but also to
                    select certain special animals as “pets,” as animals who are to be brought
                    close to the human. Such favored animals gain some of the perquisites
                    of personhood: a given name; love; access to domestic space, and to novel-
                    istic “character-space”;6 some limited hold on our memories.
                             In Emily Brontë’s Wuthering Heights, one of Heathcliff’s first utter-
                    ances is to advise a visitor to his home, Lockwood, to take care: “You’d
                    better let the dog alone . . . She’s not accustomed to be spoiled—not
                    kept for a pet.”7 Wuthering Heights is, in a manner that is characteristically
                    Victorian, preoccupied with the dividing of creatures into animal and
                    non-animal, pet and non-pet. When Heathcliff’s visitor Lockwood,
                    attempting to flirt with Cathy Linton, points to “an obscure cushion
                    full of something like cats” and asks if “your favorites are among
                    these?”8 he seems to be posing a reasonable question: every proper
                    Victorian home has its “favorite” animals, those “pets” granted love and
                    care and even a degree of partial personhood. But he makes an unpleas-
                    ant and embarrassing discovery: what he thought was a pile of living cats
                    was in fact “a heap of dead rabbits.”9 Brontë makes a mordant joke here,
                    suggesting that the Victorian love or care for animals is only slightly
                    removed from violence towards them; that to select a “favorite” animal
                    is always also implicitly to designate an indefinite larger category (here
                    a “heap”) of those considered utterly disposable.10
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. “animal,” OED Online, Oxford University Press, http://www.oed.
                            com, (accessed October 9, 2017).
                       2. Jacques Derrida, The Animal That Therefore I Am, ed. Marie-Louise Mallet,
                            trans. David Wills (New York: Fordham University Press, 2008), 32, 93.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000268

                                                                               A N I M A L , AN T H RO PO C E N E                   573
                3. Charles Darwin, The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication,
                     2nd ed. (London: John Murray, 1875), 233, http://darwin-online.
                     org.uk.
                4. Darwin, Variation, 226.
                5. Deidre Shauna Lynch, Loving Literature: A Cultural History (Chicago:
                     University of Chicago Press, 2015), 8, 10.
                6. Alex Woloch, The One Vs. the Many: Minor Characters and the Space of the
                     Protagonist in the Novel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003),
                     24.
                7. Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights, ed. Ian Jack (Oxford: Oxford
                     University Press, 1976), 5.
                8. Brontë, Wuthering Heights, 135, 8.
                9. Brontë, Wuthering Heights, 9.
              10. This essay draws on arguments I make at greater length in the intro-
                     duction to my book, Minor Creatures: Persons, Animals, and the Victorian
                     Novel (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018).
              Anthropocene
              JESSE OAK TAYLOR
              T      O describe the Anthropocene is to deploy a Victorian lexicon. This is
                     perhaps most obvious in relation to the epoch’s titular agent: the
              Anthropos. No aspect of the Anthropocene debate has been more provoc-
              ative, or controversial, than the effort to align the differential histories of
              capitalism, empire, and industrial modernity with planetary time and the
              evolutionary history of the human species. In attempting to date the
              Anthropocene, stratigraphers are looking for the “signature” of human
              action, the mark of a single species operating as an agent at the level
              of planetary systems. In that endeavor, “human action” serves as a distin-
              guishing marker from other forms of causality, whether atmospheric,
              lithic, or biological. However, humanists and social scientists have been
              quick to point out that human action is not uniform. There are vast dis-
              parities between humans in terms of both ecological impacts and vulner-
              ability to the Anthropocene’s manifold catastrophes, from rising sea
              levels to antibiotic resistant diseases. Those most at risk from ecological
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000268

