                                                                               A N I M A L , AN T H RO PO C E N E                   573
                3. Charles Darwin, The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication,
                     2nd ed. (London: John Murray, 1875), 233, http://darwin-online.
                     org.uk.
                4. Darwin, Variation, 226.
                5. Deidre Shauna Lynch, Loving Literature: A Cultural History (Chicago:
                     University of Chicago Press, 2015), 8, 10.
                6. Alex Woloch, The One Vs. the Many: Minor Characters and the Space of the
                     Protagonist in the Novel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003),
                     24.
                7. Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights, ed. Ian Jack (Oxford: Oxford
                     University Press, 1976), 5.
                8. Brontë, Wuthering Heights, 135, 8.
                9. Brontë, Wuthering Heights, 9.
              10. This essay draws on arguments I make at greater length in the intro-
                     duction to my book, Minor Creatures: Persons, Animals, and the Victorian
                     Novel (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018).
              Anthropocene
              JESSE OAK TAYLOR
              T      O describe the Anthropocene is to deploy a Victorian lexicon. This is
                     perhaps most obvious in relation to the epoch’s titular agent: the
              Anthropos. No aspect of the Anthropocene debate has been more provoc-
              ative, or controversial, than the effort to align the differential histories of
              capitalism, empire, and industrial modernity with planetary time and the
              evolutionary history of the human species. In attempting to date the
              Anthropocene, stratigraphers are looking for the “signature” of human
              action, the mark of a single species operating as an agent at the level
              of planetary systems. In that endeavor, “human action” serves as a distin-
              guishing marker from other forms of causality, whether atmospheric,
              lithic, or biological. However, humanists and social scientists have been
              quick to point out that human action is not uniform. There are vast dis-
              parities between humans in terms of both ecological impacts and vulner-
              ability to the Anthropocene’s manifold catastrophes, from rising sea
              levels to antibiotic resistant diseases. Those most at risk from ecological
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:27, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800027X

                    574          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    collapse are, consistently, those least responsible for it. Thus, while the
                    Anthropocene has already been extremely generative for scholarship in
                    the humanities (e.g., Chakrabarty, Menely and Taylor), other humanists
                    remain skeptical and argue that the concept masks inequality and perpet-
                    uates ecological injustice and have proposed terms like “Capitalocene”
                    (Malm, Moore) or “Plantationocene” (Haraway, Tsing et al.) to foreground
                    the new epoch’s inherently exploitative character.1 Dating geologic agency
                    to the industrial shift from water power to coal in the 1830s, historian
                    Andreas Malm describes this new force as “the very negation of universal
                    species being,” in that the forces disrupting Earth systems are the same
                    ones responsible for the divergence in human fortunes.2 However, from
                    a stratigraphic perspective, distinguishing one species from others (or
                    from non-biological forces operating within the hydrosphere, lithosphere,
                    or atmosphere) operates as a specifying designation rather than a universal-
                    izing one. Even if the “Anthropos” includes only a tiny subset of humanity,
                    or arises through the exploitation (or even extermination) of some human
                    groups by others, Anthropocene history is predicated upon the legibility of
                    the human within the Earth’s archives, as one species among many pre-
                    served in the fossil record.3 Thus, despite these trenchant critiques, the spe-
                    cies designation is inherent in the Anthropocene concept, particularly as it
                    appears in the stratigraphic debate over whether to designate it as a formal
                    epoch of geologic time.
                            In this regard, the Anthropocene debate revisits an earlier encounter
                    with a similar set of questions, namely Victorian debates over evolution and
                    the age of the earth, in which scientists, theologians, philosophers, writers,
                    and artists grappled with the implications of rethinking the human in
                    species terms. In this project, Victorian evolutionary theory’s misdeeds
                    are every bit as vital as its insights for understanding the Anthropocene
                    as an epoch fraught with inequity. The challenge (and opportunity) for
                    Victorian studies in the Anthropocene, then, lies not simply in looking
                    for nascent ecological insights in historical artifacts, but rather in taking
                    seriously the prospect that the Victorian era aligns with the historical
                    period during which the Anthropocene emerged. Whereas Paul Crutzen
                    and Eugene Stoermer originally proposed dating the Anthropocene to
                    the Industrial Revolution, a recent announcement by the Anthropocene
                    Working Group proposes locating the Anthropocene’s lower boundary in
                    the mid-twentieth century.4 That shift means the long nineteenth century,
                    or the period between 1784 (the steam engine) and 1945 (the nuclear
                    bomb), marks the boundary period between the Holocene and
                    the Anthropocene, an intermediate space in which to trace the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:27, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800027X

                                                                                                A N T H RO POC E N E                575
              Anthropocene’s emergence. While the question of dating the
              Anthropocene customarily focuses on the question of origins, the
              Victorian era offers a glimpse of the Anthropocene in medias res, from
              the midst of still-unfolding, slow-motion catastrophe. If the Anthropocene
              is “the very negation of universal species being” then the long nineteenth
              century is precisely the geohistorical space within which that negation
              took place. It is also the period in which many of the conceptual tools
              and rubrics—from the stratigraphic method, to the greenhouse effect,
              natural selection to anthropogenic extinction—were articulated. The
              Anthropocene thus performs an uncanny inversion of many eighteenth-
              and nineteenth-century debates and anxieties.5 A key question for
              Victorian studies in the Anthropocene, then, is how to understand the align-
              ment between these conceptual rubrics and epistemological frames and the
              broader ecological impacts within which they occurred. After all, this is the
              history that we must undo if we are to survive its aftermath.
                      For Victorianists, the problem of the Anthropocene is not simply the
              question of how (or indeed whether) a period anchored on the reign of a
              single British monarch retains coherence in the face of planetary catastro-
              phe on the one hand and deep time on the other. Instead, it arises from the
              uncanniness whereby so many Victorian artifacts seem to speak to the
              Anthropocene in ways that belie the historical remove that separates
              them from our own moment. Put differently, the question is not so much
              why the Victorians didn’t understand the Anthropocene, as tracing the
              multitudinous ways in which they did, framing the Victorian era in terms
              of what Christophe Bonneuil and Jean-Baptiste Fressoz call the “moderniz-
              ing unconscious.”6 Perhaps these two issues are not so far removed after all.
              Glimpsed from a distant future, in which all that remains of human society
              is a compressed stratigraphic trace and radically different climate, the
              Victorians become our contemporaries. Their words are still with us, just
              as the carbon spewn from their chimneys lingers overhead. As readers, writ-
              ers, and teachers we are the speakers for the dead, the living media through
              which our Victorians interlocutors can speak to the shared predicament of
              a depleted, overheated world.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. The Anthropocene conversation in the humanities was largely sparked
                   by Dipesh Chakrabarty’s influential essay “The Climate of History: Four
                   Theses,” Critical Inquiry 35, no. 2 (2009): 197–222. That essay is now part
                   of a trilogy, as Chakrabarty has followed it with “Postcolonial Studies
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:27, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800027X

                    576          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                          and the Challenge of Climate Change,” New Literary History 43, no. 1
                          (2012): 1–18; and “Climate and Capital: On Conjoined Histories,”
                          Critical Inquiry 41, no. 1 (2014): 1–23. See also the range of perspectives
                          included in Tobias Menely and Jesse Oak Taylor, eds., Anthropocene
                          Reading: Literary History in Geologic Times (University Park: Penn State
                          University Press, 2017). For critiques of the Anthropocene concept and
                          alternate terms (Capitalocene, Plantationocene, etc.) see Donna
                          J. Haraway, Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene
                          (Durham: Duke University Press, 2016); Andreas Malm, Fossil Capital:
                          The Rise of Steam Power and the Roots of Global Warming (New York: Verso,
                          2016); Jason Moore, Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the
                          Accumulation of Capital (New York: Verso, 2015); Rob Nixon, “The
                          Anthropocene: The Promise and Pitfalls of an Epochal Idea,”
                          EdgeEffects, University of Wisconsin Center for Culture, History and
                          Environment (CHE), November 6, 2014, http://edgeeffects.net/anthro-
                          pocene-promise-and-pitfalls/; Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, et al. eds., Arts of
                          Living on a Damaged Planet: Ghosts and Monsters of the Anthropocene
                          (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017).
                    2. Malm, Fossil Capital, 390–91.
                    3. See Jeremy Davies, The Birth of the Anthropocene (Oakland: University of
                          California Press, 2016), 83.
                    4. Colin N. Waters, et al. “The Anthropocene is Functionally and
                          Stratigraphically Distinct from the Holocene,” Science 351, no. 6269
                          (2016): aad2622. Geographers Mark Maslin and Simon Lewis pro-
                          posed an additional possibility, dating the Anthropocene’s emergence
                          to European conquest of the Americas, and the decimation of 90 per-
                          cent of the Indigenous inhabitants, some 50 million people. They
                          argue that the cessation of agriculture and resultant reforestation
                          across much of North and South America could represent a carbon
                          sink responsible for a dip in atmospheric CO2 legible in ice core
                          data, fixing the date at 1610. This dating aligns with the beginning of
                          the capitalist “world system” and coincides with a reshuffling of the bio-
                          sphere unseen since the breakup of Pangea (Simon L. Lewis and Mark
                          A. Maslin, “Defining the Anthropocene,” Nature 519 [March 2015]:
                          171–180). Even though this dating has been critiqued in the sciences
                          and will not be formalized, it has been embraced by many humanists
                          and remains useful in framing the Anthropocene in terms of the ecolog-
                          ical globalization wrought by empire—a dynamic of obvious relevance
                          in the Victorian era as globalization was both extended and accelerated
                          by the turn to steam. See Dana Luciano, “The Inhuman
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:27, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800027X

                                                                              ANTH RO POCENE, AUTH O R                              577
                   Anthropocene,” Avidly, Los Angeles Review of Books, March 22, 2015,
                   http://avidly.lareviewofbooks.org/2015/03/22/the-inhuman-anthro-
                   pocene/; and Steve Mentz, “Enter the Anthropocene, Circa 1610,” in
                   Anthropocene Reading, 43–58.
              5. See Eric Gidal, Ossianic Unconformities: Bardic Poetry in the Industrial Age.
                   (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2015); Noah Heringman,
                   “Deep Time at the Dawn of the Anthropocene,” Representations 129
                   (Winter 2015): 56–85.
              6. Christophe Bonneuil and Jean-Baptiste Fessoz, The Shock of the
                   Anthropocene: The Earth, History, and Us, trans. David Fernbach
                   (New York: Verso, 2016), 199.
              Author
              ANDREW ELFENBEIN
              I   N a typical literary critical essay, the author, rather than being a
                   consistent concept, shifts rapidly among different, sometimes incom-
              patible assumptions, evidence, and purposes: a biographical person, a
              synonym for the narrator, an implied presence governing an entire
              work, a metonym lending coherence to a career, an item in a list charac-
              terizing a movement or a period, the receiver or producer of literary or
              contextual influences. This mosaic is and is not productive. It enables a
              shorthand that lets literary critics gloss over complex, messy questions to
              zero in on textual analysis. Yet those messy questions never go away and
              haunt the margins of analysis with unfinished business. Literary critics
              have not ignored Foucault’s “What is an Author?” but they have skipped
              its relevance to their own practice.1 The large question of “What is an
              author?” has blocked the smaller but more pressing question, “What
              should an author be in a work of literary criticism?”
                      I list some familiar manifestations of the author found in much lit-
              erary criticism. I developed this list by generating all the different ver-
              sions of the author that appeared in a single paragraph in a
              representative work of Victorian literary criticism; I am less interested
              in criticizing this work than in describing figurations of the author
              found throughout scholarship.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:27, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800027X

