                    580          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    2. For a powerful criticism of this figuration of the author, see Nancy
                          Armstrong and Leonard Tennenhouse, “The Mind of Milton,” ch. 1
                          of The Imaginary Puritan: Literature, Intellectual Labor, and the Origins
                          of Personal Life (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 27–46.
                    3. For the classic New Critical statement, see Frank H. Ellis, “Gray’s
                          Elegy: The Biographical Problem in Literary Criticism,” PMLA 66,
                          no. 6 (1951): 971–1008.
                    4. Amanda Anderson, “The Temptations of Aggrandized Agency:
                          Feminist Histories and the Horizon of Modernity,” Victorian Studies
                          43, no. 1 (2000): 43–65.
                    5. Henry James, Preface to The Tragic Muse (New York: Charles
                          Scribner’s Sons, 1922), x.
                    Authorship
                    ANDREA SELLERI
                    L       ET us imagine that a diverse group of scholars of English literature
                            were asked to provide a one-minute explanation of why authorship
                    is a worthwhile subject for academic enquiry. Prima facie, the facts of
                    the matter seem straightforward: a person conceives a series of ideas,
                    puts them in writing, and publishes them; if enough people are prepared
                    to pay to read the results, the author gets a share of the profit; if the writ-
                    ing brings about a crime or misdemeanour (e.g. slander or plagiarism),
                    the author is responsible in the eyes of the law.1 But in contrast to this
                    straightforwardness on paper, literary scholars continue to produce an
                    enormous quantity of research dealing with “authorship.” Nor is this usu-
                    ally a matter of determining who wrote some unsigned piece (the most
                    intuitive interpretation of the term). Articles are written, lectures given,
                    bids for research grants tremulously penned to study a concept that to
                    the layperson may not appear to need such an expense of intellectual
                    application. So, why is authorship interesting?
                            I suspect that the immediate mental associations prompted by this
                    bald request would be strikingly different for different literary scholars,
                    depending on the prevalent directions that inquiry has taken in their sub-
                    field. Those of a philosophical bent, for example, would likely cast their
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000293

                                                                                                      A U T H O R S HI P            581
              minds back to that episode of the “theory wars” that concerned the theo-
              retical and ideological viability of the notion of the author, and which
              resulted in a steady stream of scholarship from Barthes’s and Foucault’s
              famous essays well into the 1990s.2 Scholars of medieval and early modern
              literature, where questions of textual reproduction and distribution have
              dominated the field, would likely think of social or technological history.3
              The default direction for scholars of the eighteenth century would proba-
              bly be the history of development of copyright law.4 Romanticists’ most
              likely first port of call would be intellectual history, following from
              M. H. Abrams’s foundational study of Romantic poetic theory.5 To read a
              broad-range book like Andrew Bennett’s The Author, which lithely spans
              the period from antiquity to the present, is to become keenly aware of
              the differences in approach between different communities of scholars.6
              This methodological heterogeneity raises several questions: is authorship
              primarily interesting as a theoretical concept? As a historical notion? If
              so, which history—material, social, intellectual? If the answer is “all of
              the above,” what is the relationship between these approaches?
                      I will come back to this point on heterogeneity in literary studies
              shortly. For now, one disappointing feature of Bennett’s otherwise excel-
              lent introduction—that he makes no reference to Victorian writers—
              leads me to the matter of the significance of authorship for Victorian stud-
              ies. From histories of criticism, introductions and readers one may well be
              led to conclude that between “The Romantic Author” and “Formalism” (to
              follow Bennett’s headings) nothing much happened; or, less bluntly put,
              that the Victorian period was a relatively uneventful continuation and con-
              solidation of the Romantic ways of thinking about authorship that were
              later challenged by Modernist criticism.7 And yet, in the Project Muse data-
              base, if we restrict the results to studies in Victorian literature published
              over the past ten years, the keyword “authorship” yields 532 results between
              books, articles and reviews; and this is far from a complete overview of the
              field (Cambridge University Press and Oxford University Press publications,
              for example, are excluded from the search results). Authorship is obviously
              an important keyword for many scholars of Victorian literature. The ques-
              tion, then, arises of what we are writing about.
                      While I cannot claim to have read all these works, I have frequented
              the scholarship on authorship in the Victorian period and the periods
              before and after it extensively enough, and I want to propose a general-
              ization: that the foremost peculiarity of Victorian studies’ otherwise var-
              ied approaches to authorship is a tendency to work quite closely within
              the paradigm of historical materialism. What this means in practice is
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000293

                    582          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    that most of us are less interested in the author and authorship as inter-
                    pretive concepts that inflect our apprehension of literary works (as is the
                    case for many scholars of Romanticism and Modernism) than in the eco-
                    nomic, social and professional aspects of authorship in the dictionary
                    sense—what Richard Salmon, in a notable study in this vein, calls the
                    “Victorian literary profession.”8 Since the turn of the century, many
                    research outputs on Victorian authorship have been published, dealing
                    with such matters as patent law,9 the Victorian publishing industry,10
                    the economics of authors’ readings from their works,11 the material dif-
                    ficulties that some writers, especially women, had in getting published.12
                    If we cast our minds back to the spectrum of approaches I outlined
                    above, these studies are representative of the field in that they share a
                    concern with material and social history, rather than intellectual history
                    or the theory of interpretation.13
                             Of course, I don’t think there is anything intrinsically wrong
                    with this tendency—a common one in Victorian studies, whatever the
                    topic—or that adopting one approach rather than another necessarily
                    results in a better or worse book or article. I do want to argue, however,
                    that we could do more to integrate scholarship on this topic in Victorian
                    studies with the concerns shared by scholars dealing with the periods on
                    either side of ours. Certain questions in literary history that extend
                    beyond our allotted chronological boundaries would be the better for
                    such an integration. For instance, what happened to the dominant
                    Romantic theories of authorship in the Victorian period? Is it possible
                    to inscribe the Modernist ideal of impersonality in a longer intellectual
                    line that goes back to the literary culture of nineteenth-century Britain
                    (and not only to French writers such as Flaubert and the Goncourts)?
                    These are some of the questions I have broached in my own work, and
                    the historical-materialistic approach alone will not answer them.
                    Answering them requires an engagement with other approaches, such
                    as the history of ideas and the theory of criticism. The result will be a
                    more abstract kind of history, but a legitimate one nonetheless, and
                    one that could prompt a fruitful interaction with colleagues outside
                    Victorian studies.
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. For the U. K. law see the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
                            (c. 48), Part 1, Ch. 1, §9.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000293

                                                                                                      A U T H O R S HI P            583
                2. Both here and in the other notes, I only give a few representative
                     examples. Roland Barthes, “La mort de l’auteur,” Manteia 5
                     (1968): 12–17; Michel Foucault: “Qu’est-ce qu’un auteur?” Bulletin
                     de la Societé Française de Philosophie 63 (1969): 73–104. For two influen-
                     tial articles in the analytic tradition, see Peter Lamarque, “The Death
                     of the Author: An Analytical Autopsy,” British Journal of Aesthetics 30,
                     no. 4 (1990): 319–31; Paisley Livingston, “Intentionalism in
                     Aesthetics,” New Literary History 29, no. 4 (1998): 831–46.
                3. Alexandra Gillespie, Print Culture and the Medieval Author: Chaucer,
                     Lydgate and Their Books, 1473–1557 (Oxford: Oxford University
                     Press, 2006).
                4. Mark Rose, “The Public Sphere and the Emergence of Copyright:
                     Areopagitica, the Stationers’ Company, and the Statute of Anne,” in
                     Privilege and Property. Essays on the History of Copyright, ed. Ronan
                     Deazley, Martin Kretschmer and Lionel Bently (Cambridge: Open
                     Book Publishers, 2010).
                5. Meyer Howard Abrams, The Mirror and the Lamp: Romantic Theory and
                     the Critical Tradition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1953).
                6. Andrew Bennett, The Author (London: Routledge, 2005).
                7. E.g., Seán Burke, ed., Authorship: From Plato to Postmodern. A Reader
                     (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1995).
                8. Richard Salmon, The Formation of the Victorian Literary Profession
                     (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013).
                9. Clare Pettitt, Patent Inventions: Intellectual Property and the Victorian
                     Novel (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004).
              10. Lillian Nayder, Unequal Partners: Charles Dickens, Wilkie Collins and
                     Victorian Authorship (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2002).
              11. Amanda Adams, Performing Authorship in the Nineteenth-Century
                     Transatlantic Lecture Tour (Farnham: Ashgate, 2004).
              12. Amanda Peterson, Becoming a Woman of Letters: Myths of Authorship and
                     Facts of the Victorian Market (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
                     2009).
              13. A notable exception is Suzy Anger, Victorian Interpretation (Ithaca:
                     Cornell University Press, 2005). There have also been a number of
                     shorter studies in this vein.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000293

