                    594          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       5. For valuable state-of-the-field essays, see Helen Brocklehurst and
                            Robert Phillips, eds., History, Nationhood and the Question of Britain
                            (Houndsmills: Palgrave, 2004).
                       6. G. Bruce, “The Battle of Tel-el-Kebir,” reprinted in The Poets of the
                            People’s Journal, ed. Kirstie Blair (Glasgow: ASLS, 2016), 182–83.
                       7. Graeme Morton, Unionist Nationalism: Governing Urban Scotland,
                            1830–1860 (East Linton: Tuckwell Press, 1999).
                       8. Robert Booth, “Boris Johnson caught on camera reciting Kipling in
                            Myanmar temple,” Guardian, September 29, 2017, https://www.the-
                            guardian.com/politics/2017/sep/30/boris-johnson-caught-on-cam-
                            era-reciting-kipling-in-myanmar-temple.
                       9. “Leave rally in Newport, Wales,” Guardian June 24, 2016, https://www.
                            theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/24/eu-referendum-brexit-
                            live-europe-leave-remain-britain?page=with:block-576d3bc6e4b0be24
                            d34f5ede.
                    10. “Nicola Sturgeon speech marking 20 years since Scotland’s
                            devolution referendum,” Scottish National Party, September 11,
                            2017, https://www.snp.org/nicola_sturgeon_speech_20_years_since_
                            scotlands_devolution_referendum.
                    11. Cited in Morton, Unionist Nationalism, 142.
                    Canon
                    TALIA SCHAFFER
                    “T           HE great English novelists are Jane Austen, George Eliot, Henry
                                 James, and Joseph Conrad,” wrote F. R. Leavis in 1948, initiating
                    the Great Tradition.1 Great works, Leavis argued, were timeless, univer-
                    sal, “vital” (to use a favorite term). Seventy years later, however, we
                    tend to see literary texts as historically enmeshed, we are skeptical of
                    claims of literary quality, and we consider ourselves entitled to discuss
                    any text that intrigues us. How did such a radical change occur?
                             The turning point came a generation after Leavis, in the canon wars
                    of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Led by Allan Bloom (The Closing of the
                    American Mind), Roger Kimball (Tenured Radicals), Harold Bloom (The
                    Western Canon), and Dinesh D’Souza (Illiberal Education), these writers
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000335

                                                                                                                  CAN ON            595
              argued that the purpose of literary study was to learn the great works of
              the masters, who happened to be white and male. They depicted women
              and people of color as barbarians invading the sacred academy, dragging
              their own unsatisfactory texts behind them. The National Association of
              Scholars was founded in 1987 to challenge what it regarded as political
              correctness in the academy and to commit to the great works of
              Western civilization.2 By 1995, English curricula had become so contro-
              versial that the New York Times covered Georgetown’s alteration to
              required courses for the English major as national news, evidence of a
              nationwide decline in standards.3
                      Progressive scholars fought back. Barbara Herrnstein Smith’s
              Contingencies of Value (1991) took on the notion of “the timeless virtues
              of a fixed object” by asserting that a text might “perform certain
              desired/able functions quite well for some set of subjects,” and that
              those functions shifted over time, accommodating different subjects’
              needs, according to an evolutionary logic.4 Gerald Graff’s Beyond the
              Culture Wars (1993) framed the argument itself as the point; a vibrant,
              diverse battlefield of ideas could give students a rejuvenating intellectual
              experience. In Cultural Capital (1995), John Guillory argued that the
              canon wars were not a debate over democratic pluralism but rather a
              fight over who was allowed to assert that certain texts deserved cultural
              capital.
                      Graff, Guillory, and Herrnstein Smith were the generals, but the
              canon wars were won by the foot soldiers. The vast mass of English pro-
              fessors and their students marched steadily towards inclusivity, for several
              reasons. One is that given the choice between working on a lot of things
              and working on very few, most people will prefer the former. Victorianists
              enjoyed expanding their work, not only into new authors but also into
              new areas: advertising, periodicals, culinary work, fashion, domestic inte-
              riors. Second, the growing work in African diaspora, Caribbean, Latino,
              queer studies, and women’s studies (to pick just a few examples) became
              its own argument. Over time these works became enshrined as worthy,
              accruing the kind of scholarly apparatus that marks canonical status,
              and scholars trained in such methods began to look at familiar
              Victorian texts with fresh eyes, generating new readings.
                      A generation after the canon wars, digital technologies offer a par-
              ticularly powerful anticanonical tool. The perception of limitless avail-
              ability overrides the actual patchiness of online access, and reading
              texts on personal devices cradled in the palms of our hands makes
              them feel cozily familiar. Moreover, digitized texts can feel neutral.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000335

                    596          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    When a database calls up Jane Eyre and a temperance tract with equal
                    facility and in identical formats, that powerfully suggests equivalent inter-
                    est. Digitization makes all texts into data, and no data is more ‘vital’ (to
                    use Leavis’s term) than any other.
                            At the same time, we have become far more aware of the complex
                    ways that people read, as we know about camp reclamation, reading
                    against the grain, symptomatic reading, and reader reception theory.
                    We also recognize how much economic and material factors shape the
                    reception of a text. Did a publisher keep a book in print at a key time?
                    Was an author able to participate in lucrative publishing networks? Did
                    a biography appear at the right moment to interest a new generation?5
                    Moreover, the plenitude of Victorian work allows us to adopt a different
                    metric from quality: popularity. John Sutherland has estimated there may
                    have been 60,000 works of Victorian fiction, double if one counts tracts
                    and short stories—to say nothing of drama or poetry.6 We have canons
                    consisting of popular writing (sensation, Gothic, etc).
                            Recently, the Stanford Literary Lab brought these movements
                    together by analyzing popularity interacting with prestige, “the market
                    and the school,” to conclude that the canon is merely “the contingent out-
                    come of the encounter between opposite forces.”7 The Literary Lab’s
                    quantitative interplay of “forces” is a long way from Leavis’s autocratic
                    assertion. To “prestige” and “popularity” we might add a third key canon-
                    ical factor: historical and conceptual interest, or what we might call “per-
                    tinence.” What texts (nonfictional, fictional, dramatic, and poetic) reveal
                    Victorian constructs of race and gender, define liberalism, generate scien-
                    tific or environmental visions, imagine empire or industrialism? If tradi-
                    tional canonicity stressed a mythic timelessness, Victorianists today prize
                    its opposite, the way in which a texts is embedded in a highly particular
                    historical nexus. Rather than a narrative of transcendent continuity, we
                    often look for alterity, a different mode of thought.
                            Today Victorianists have virtually no limits on what we can read, and
                    that lifting of canonical policing has made new fields possible: ecocriti-
                    cism, science studies, studies of religion, periodical studies, studies of
                    imperial culture, travel narratives, thing theory, not to mention expand-
                    ing previous fields like women’s writing and children’s literature. Yet ele-
                    ments of canon-wars discourse survive today, although directed at how we
                    read rather than what we read. Those 1990s assumptions resurface, spe-
                    cifically, in articles attacking digital humanities. These critics regard liter-
                    ary study as a zero-sum game where adding new elements displaces
                    others; idealize older methods as disinterested truth; resent newcomers’
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000335

                                                                                                                  CAN ON            597
              institutional support and funding.8 Today Victorianists argue over surface
              reading, symptomatic reading, distant reading, historicist reading, and
              affective reading. In the generation since the canon wars, Victorianists
              have come to embrace all the texts we can get. The next generation of
              Victorianists may have a different task: to accommodate all the methodol-
              ogies we can use. The canon wars may have given way to the reading wars.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. F. R. Leavis, The Great Tradition, (1948; New York: New York University
                   Press, 1963), 1.
              2. “History of NAS,” National Association of Scholars, https://www.nas.org/
                   about/history.
              3. “Shakespeare, Milton, Chaucer, Get Demoted at Georgetown,” New York
                   Times, December 20, 1995, http://www.nytimes.com/1995/12/20/us/
                   shakespeare-milton-chaucer-get-demoted-at-georgetown.html.
              4. Barbara Herrnstein Smith, Contingencies of Value: Alternative Perspectives
                   for Critical Theory (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1988), 47.
              5. See Heather Jackson, Those Who Write for Immortality: Romantic
                   Reputations and the Dream of Lasting Fame (New Haven: Yale
                   University Press, 2015).
              6. John Sutherland, The Stanford Companion to Victorian Literature
                   (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1990), 1.
              7. Mark Algee-Hewitt, et al., “Pamphlet 11, Canon/archive,” Stanford
                   Literary Lab, https://litlab.stanford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet11.
              8. See for instance Daniel Allington, Sarah Brouillette, David Golumbia.
                   “Neoliberal Tools (and Archives): A Political History of Digital
                   Humanities,” Los Angeles Review of Books, May 1, 2016; Timothy
                   Brennan, “The Digital-Humanities Bust,” The Chronicle of Higher
                   Education, October 15, 2017.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000335

