                    598          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Career
                    AMANPAL GARCHA
                            HE “career” is one of the most important concepts driving academic
                    T       discourse in Victorian studies—and much of English studies—today.
                    Part of the reason for the career’s importance to academia has to do with
                    the fact that ours is one of the few professional areas that still holds out
                    the possibility of a career trajectory similar to the one that, during the
                    decades from about the 1850s and the 1980s, structured millions of individ-
                    uals’ ambitions. Today, workers in almost all areas of the Western economy
                    face job prospects that are radically unpredictable and unstable, which
                    means that few even imagine following linear, predictable career-paths.
                    Thus, a much different term—precarity—has come to describe the occu-
                    pational prospects of those in the contemporary work force.
                            Yet, a path of predictability and stability for educated workers was
                    exactly what the “career” offered when it was established during the nine-
                    teenth century. As Nicholas Dames has shown, the Civil Service reforms
                    of the 1850s, along with the rationalization of colonial governance in
                    India, gave rise to a new narrative of professional success.1 This kind of
                    success rewarded expertise in the administration of bureaucratic tasks;
                    prominence came to those who achieved seniority or rose within “pre-
                    scheduled channels” to the top of an organizational hierarchy estab-
                    lished according to values of efficiency and stability.2 As Max Weber sug-
                    gested at the beginning of the twentieth century, the modern “career”
                    differed in important respects from the older ideals of promotion, in
                    which success derived from the securing of “individual privileges and
                    bestowal of favor.”3 The modern career required specific skills, not
                    diverse abilities or loyalty to a particular ruler or official, and a person’s
                    career path proceeded according to externally constructed steps that
                    depended, at least in theory, on rational, meritocratic evaluations.4
                            When Pierre Bourdieu was writing Homo Academicus (1984), one of
                    the first extensive analyses of intellectuals’ relationships to institutional
                    hierarchies, Western culture’s reigning conception of a professional
                    occupation was still this narrative one of the bureaucratic career. Like
                    those who began corporate, civil-service, legal, and other careers, aca-
                    demics entering the professoriate were choosing to take part in an “obsta-
                    cle race where everyone classifies and everyone is classified, the best
                    classified becoming the best classifiers of those who enter the race,” as
                    Bourdieu put it.5 In academia, the hurdles along this linear obstacle
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000347

                                                                                                                 CARE ER            599
              course seem clear: they include a tenure-track job, tenure, promotion to
              full professor, and the accumulation of other signs of prestige (the ability
              to get hired at a higher-ranked department, prizes, invitations to deliver
              keynote addresses, etc.).
                      Despite, or because of, the decades-long erosion of the opportunities
              for junior scholars to enter this defined academic career-path, such a path
              has become the focus of immense amounts of commentary. This discourse
              has taken the form of articles, essays, websites, and guidebooks advising aca-
              demics how to prepare successfully for the job market, how to publish arti-
              cles, how to navigate tenure requirements, and how to meet universities’
              teaching and service requirements. At times, it can seem as if entire sections
              of The Chronicle of Higher Education have been set aside for humanities
              professors to provide advice about academic careers and to discuss the
              difficulties of maintaining one. Scholars of the nineteenth century have
              also trained their attention on the historical roots of academic profession-
              alization. Gerald Graff’s Professing Literature: An Institutional History
              (1987) laid the groundwork for subsequent studies on how intellectual
              work in English studies became institutionalized and bureaucratized.
              Other works, including Evan Watkins’s Work Time: English Departments
              and the Circulation of Cultural Value (1989), Michael Bérubé’s The
              Employment of English: Theory, Jobs, and the Future of Literary Studies (1996),
              Catherine Gallagher’s “The History of Literary Criticism” (1997), and his-
              torian Julie Reuben’s The Making of the Modern University: Intellectual
              Transformation And The Marginalization Of Morality (1996) all contributed
              to making the academic career the object of research.
                      Thus, by the 1990s, when the job-market crisis overtook theory as the
              dominant topic of conversations among literary scholars, literary critics
              could write about careers as a way to further their own. At the same
              time, the concept of the career had started to transform itself in the busi-
              ness and public worlds. As a way of registering capitalism’s increasing reli-
              ance on temporary workers, the “career” has come to name any sequence
              of jobs an individual has held, not a single, defined track. Douglas Hall, a
              prominent scholar of business employment, calls this new kind of occupa-
              tional track the “protean” or “boundaryless” career, to differentiate it from
              the more linear narrative one that was established in Victorian England. As
              he writes in his 2002 book, Careers In and Out of Organizations (2002), the
              protean career has become common owing to the increasingly swift
              pace of economic change, a sense of permanent “turbulence,” and the
              “tremendous increase in self-employment, independent contracting, pri-
              vate consultants, entrepreneurship, and the like” driven by finance
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000347

                    600          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    capitalism’s and information technology’s disruptive effects.6 Academia’s
                    reliance on adjunct, non-tenure-track faculty is part of the trend Hall rec-
                    ognizes; his “protean career” can be viewed as a redemptive term describ-
                    ing the precarity that temporary workers, including academics, face.
                            When Victorianists have not written about academic careers directly,
                    they have, since the 1990s, examined the history of associated concepts.
                    The birth of “professions” in the Victorian era has attracted particular
                    attention; examples of literary critics analyzing professionalization
                    include Mary Poovey’s “The Man-of-Letters Hero: David Copperfield and
                    the Professional Writer” in Uneven Developments (1988), Monica
                    Feinberg Cohen’s Professional Domesticity in the Victorian Novel: Women,
                    Work and Home (1998), and Richard Salmon’s recent The Formation of
                    the Victorian Literary Profession (2015), among many others. And, the
                    idea of the literary career has become an important analytic concept
                    in several examinations of aesthetic and formal elements in Victorian lit-
                    erature; these include David Kurnick’s Empty Houses: Theatrical Failure and
                    the Novel (2011) and my own From Sketch to Novel: The Development of
                    Victorian Fiction (2009). Much of the field of Victorian book and media
                    history, with its attention to modern mechanisms of publication, profit,
                    and celebrity, might also be seen as an expression of academics’ career-
                    minded interests: in today’s scholarly field, publication plays a key role in
                    advancement, and because scholars are rewarded for understanding its
                    processes, it makes sense that they might direct their gaze toward analo-
                    gous processes in the 1800s.
                            Our attention to the advent of structured professional careers in the
                    nineteenth century as well as to the dynamics affecting careers today tes-
                    tifies, perhaps, to an anxious nostalgia among today’s scholars for viable,
                    legible career paths in an era of precarity, or to our deep investments in
                    the security afforded by tenure-track careers, even as they disappear for
                    most workers. More generally, this attention, along with the copious
                    amounts of writing about the academic job market, suggests that contem-
                    porary issues about academics’ professional, class, and economic status,
                    as well as about the structures that define academics’ jobs, define the
                    objects of our analysis and research.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Nicholas Dames, “Trollope and the Career: Vocational Trajectories
                          and the Management of Ambition,” Victorian Studies 45, no. 2
                          (2003): 247–78.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000347

                                                                                         CAREER, CARIBBEAN                          601
              2. Celia Moore, Hugh Gunz, and Douglas T. Hall, “Tracing the
                   Historical Roots Of Career Theory in Management and
                   Organization Studies,” in Handbook of Career Studies, ed. Hugh Gunz
                   and Maury Peiperl (Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, 2007), 18.
              3. Max Weber, Economy and Society, ed. and trans. by Guenther Roth and
                   Claus Wittich (1921; Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1968),
                   958.
              4. As Weber states in his chapter on “Bureaucracy” in Economy and Society,
                   the bureaucratic official is “set for a ‘career’ within [a] hierarchical
                   order. . . . He expects to move from the lower, less important and
                   less well paid, to the higher position. The average official naturally
                   desires a mechanical fixing of the conditions of promotion” (963).
              5. Pierre Bourdieu, Homo Academicus, trans. Peter Collier (Stanford:
                   Stanford University Press, 1988), 217.
              6. Donald Hall, Careers In and Out of Organizations (Thousand Oaks: Sage
                   Publications, 2002), 6.
              Caribbean
              TIM WATSON
              A      LTHOUGH I’m not sure Raymond Williams would approve, this
                      Victorian keyword essay begins with a twenty-first-century keyword
              search. Using the University of Miami’s Project Muse subscription, a search
              for “Caribbean” in the journal Victorian Studies since 2000 yields 46 items, of
              which only ten are full-length articles. Perhaps unsurprisingly for a field
              that embeds a British monarch in its name, keyword searches in Victorian
              Studies for British geographical locations result in far more hits: 243 for
              Edinburgh, 293 for Manchester, and 1,462 for London. By this measure,
              the Caribbean is about as important as Brighton (40) and Newcastle
              (47). When Victorian Studies focuses on imperial and international topics,
              India (389), America (348), Ireland (291), and Australia (208) count as
              much more important than the Caribbean. Comparisons to journals in
              American literary and cultural studies are instructive: Early American
              Literature (159 results for “Caribbean” since 2000) and Early American
              Studies (112 results since 2003) are far more Caribbean-focused. Most
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000347

