                                                                                       C I R C U L ATI O N, C L A SS                625
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Antoinette Burton, Empire in Question: Reading, Writing, and Teaching
                   British Imperialism (Durham: Duke University Press 2011), 278.
              2. Warwick Anderson, The Cultivation of Whiteness: Science, Health, and
                   Racial Destiny in Australia (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006), 13.
              3. Thomas Keneally, Australians: Eureka to the Diggers (Sydney: Allen and
                   Unwin, 2011), 11.
              4. “Fainting by the Way,” Sydney Morning Herald, August 1, 1861, 3.
              5. “Reported Discovery of Burke and of his Companions,” Illawarra
                   Mercury, October 1, 1861, 4.
              6. “Verses. By Henry Kendall. (Unpublished.),” Athenaeum, September 27,
                   1862, 395.
              7. W. T. Stead, “To All English-Speaking Folk,” Review of Reviews 1, no. 1
                   (Jan. 1890): 19.
              8. W. T. Stead, “The Reviews Reviewed: The Indian World,” Review of
                   Reviews 32, no. 187 (1995): 83.
              Class
              DEBORAH EPSTEIN NORD
              I   N 1958 Raymond Williams offered five keywords for understanding the
                   last decades of the eighteenth century and first half of the nineteenth:
              class, industry, democracy, art, and culture.1 Though these are all obviously
              interrelated, the first three are deeply connected and, indeed, inseparable
              in a way that not only helps to demonstrate why “class” dominated analysis
              of the Victorian period in the past but also suggests why the term is crucial
              to grasping what the Victorians themselves were thinking about and zeal-
              ously trying to comprehend. Without industry, there was no industrial
              working class and no manufacturing class, the two segments of a new social
              order that most confounded observers and reformers. Without a rising
              working class, there would have been no Chartism and no 1832 Reform
              Bill, the first, if radically incomplete, step to representative democracy. If
              the term and its variants loomed large in the literature of the Victorian
              age and only slightly less large in the birth of Victorian Studies, the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:11, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000414

                    626          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    interdisciplinary movement of the mid-to-late twentieth century, it has
                    fallen out of favor in recent decades. I lament its passing and long to
                    see it revived as an important focus of literary and cultural analysis.
                            How did the division of society into distinct strata animate the Victorian
                    imagination? Why did this Victorian obsession form the basis for an interdis-
                    ciplinary Victorian Studies? And how has the idea of class recently been
                    eclipsed—or erased—in literary study of the period? To begin with the sec-
                    ond question first: The work of Victorianists in the U. K. reflected both the
                    influence of Marxism and the consciousness of an enduring class system.
                    Cultural materialists like Williams and critics of the novel like Arnold
                    Kettle, Peter Keating, John Lucas, John Goode, and (the young) Terry
                    Eagleton stressed the centrality of class to Victorian writing and, with it, pol-
                    itics, political ideology, class conflict, and what Williams importantly called
                    “structures of feeling.”2 In traditionally American fashion, U. S. critics came
                    less easily to the subject of class, but a commitment to interdisciplinarity in
                    the early days of Victorian Studies meant that their historicist approach to
                    literature insured an inescapable alertness to class and, perhaps to a lesser
                    degree than their U. K. counterparts, politics.
                            Marx and Engels may have provided the conceptual and ideological
                    frame for mid-century critics, especially British ones, to think about cul-
                    ture generally, but Marx and Engels were also eminently appropriate
                    guides to the very decades that formed them and their vision of history.
                    They were products of their time, to understate the case, not just because
                    they crafted their philosophy of social change and revolution in response
                    to the realities of nineteenth-century industrialization and the creation of
                    industrial cities but because they were engaged in an enterprise that was
                    almost identical to that of their British contemporaries: charting, defin-
                    ing, and choreographing the formation of classes in the industrial
                    period. As Marx and Engels would have it, new modes of production
                    and exchange—industrial manufacture and capitalism—laid the ground
                    for the rise of two new classes. Both the proletariat and the bourgeoisie
                    emerged out of a long evolutionary process of invention, navigation,
                    industry, trade, and the modern state.3 But the advent of these two classes
                    was of slightly less importance to the authors of The Communist Manifesto
                    than delineating the relationship between them. And this constituted
                    their most important hypothesis: that these two groups stood in perpet-
                    ual opposition to one another, in a relation of conflict, antagonism,
                    exploitation, oppression, struggle, and warfare.
                            If for Marx and Engels this history of class struggle would end even-
                    tually in a proletarian revolution and the violent overthrow of the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:11, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000414

                                                                                                                    C L A SS        627
              bourgeoisie, for their English contemporaries, Raymond Williams
              reminded us about the literature of 1848 and after, some form of recon-
              ciliation, change of heart, or recognition of common humanity might be
              an achievable antidote to callousness and class conflict.4 Many novelists
              evaded altogether the implications of the “intense, overt class conscious-
              ness” of this era, while others sought to solve it superficially, through the
              plot conventions of the “fortunate legacy” or the fantastical cross-class
              marriage.5 Dickens, in a different and deeper mode, sought to promote
              reconciliation through the renovation of the reader’s spirit, while the
              Gaskell of Mary Barton managed to expose her readers directly to imag-
              ined experiences of loss and grief in the lives of impoverished, mourning,
              and often starving industrial workers.6 What Rosemarie Bodenheimer
              called the “politics of story” was accompanied by what Williams called
              “deep form” and inventive modes of transforming the reader.7
                      Whether because of sympathy, recognition of abuse, or outright fear of
              the consequences of social strife and the very possibility of revolution,
              Victorian writers embraced the vatic role of chastising the exploiters, hector-
              ing or consoling the exploited, and prophesying change. They also habitu-
              ally classified and named the various strata of society in an effort to identify
              and, perhaps, contain them, but their nomenclature (Matthew Arnold’s
              word) was not that of Marx and Engels.8 Industrial observers regularly called
              the Marxian bourgeoisie and proletariat “masters and men” and factory
              workers “hands.” Mayhew referred to middle-class urban dwellers and the
              lumpenproletariat as “settlers” and “wanderers” or “wandering tribes.”9
              Arnold’s aristocrats were “Barbarians,” his middle class “Philistines,” and
              his working class the “Populace.”10 For the Carlyle of Past and Present
              (1843), who favored identifying class beliefs, sensibilities, and habits rather
              than classes themselves, associated the Gospel of Mammonism with the mid-
              dle class (or the “Working Aristocracy”) and the Gospel of Dilettantism with
              the aristocracy or governing class.11 Interestingly, perhaps because he val-
              ued labor as an ideal in itself and was ultimately concerned with how to rec-
              ognize the heroes or ideal rulers of society, who would come, he believed,
              from the upper ranks or Captains of Industry, he did not invent a totalizing
              epithet for working-class habits and attitudes, at least not at this stage of his
              career.
                      It is worth noting that neither Carlyle’s nor Arnold’s notion of class was
              a static one: the dynamic of change built into each of their systems of
              classification expressed a crucial belief in—or, at least, aspiration
              toward—reform, perhaps even radical change. By shedding the worst
              excesses of Mammonism (“Supply-and-demand, Competition,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:11, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000414

                    628          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Laissez-faire, Devil take the hindmost”), absorbing the admonitions and
                    threats of trades-unions and Chartists, and heeding their own astute
                    sense of “the facts of things,” Carlyle’s Working Aristocracy would
                    “assuredly reform themselves, and a working world will be possible.”12 In
                    Arnold’s drastically non-Marxian scheme, class consciousness would fall
                    away from some of the elect and they, the “aliens” in each class, would
                    escape their ordinary selves to cultivate their best and band together with
                    other classless individuals to govern wisely and humanely.13
                             If, as I imagine, class has dropped out of our analyses of Victorian
                    texts, what are the reasons for this disappearance? Among them: the ascen-
                    dancy of categories of race, gender, and sexuality; a shift in focus from
                    nation to empire and then globe; the discrediting of Marxist criticism in
                    the wake of Communism’s decline; the weakening of the labor movement
                    in the U. S.; a Foucauldian emphasis on discourse (the linguistic turn) and
                    the impossibility of group or class-based mobilization and resistance; a crit-
                    ical emphasis on types of “reading” and form rather than ideology, covert
                    meaning, and literature as Jeremiad; and (perhaps) our own American
                    allergy, in this season especially virulent, to seeing class.14
                             I realize that to recommend the resurrection of class as a focus for crit-
                    icism risks too backward-looking a stance. To disregard the Victorians’
                    obsession with class, their consciousness of living through seismic shifts
                    in class arrangements, their imaginative transmutation into literature of
                    the anxieties, opportunities, and sheer drama inherent in social change,
                    and their vision of a renovated society also, however, carries risks. We
                    might deny thereby not only the essence of a period of history and the
                    achievements of its literature but also the crises of our own volatile age.
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. Raymond Williams, Culture and Society 1780–1950 (Harmondsworth,
                            Middlesex: Penguin, 1961), 13–15.
                       2. Williams, Culture, 99.
                       3. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party
                            (New York: International Publishers, 2016), 9–11. Marx and Engels’s
                            account of the evolutionary process of industrialization in The
                            Communist Manifesto (1844) was undoubtedly influenced by Carlyle’s
                            very similar, if more elaborately rhetorical, account in Chartism (1839).
                            For Carlyle’s influence on Engels, see Steven Marcus, Engels,
                            Manchester, and the Working Class (New York: Random House, 1974),
                            103–04, 110–12.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:11, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000414

                                                                                                                    C L A SS        629
                4. Raymond Williams, “Forms of English Fiction in 1848,” in Writing in
                     Society (1977; London: Verso, 1985), 150–66; Williams, Culture, 99–119.
                5. Williams, “Forms of English Fiction,” 163.
                6. Williams, “Forms of English Fiction,” 163–64.
                7. Williams, "Forms of English Fiction, 163. The seed of Rosemarie
                     Bodenheimer’s The Politics of Story in Victorian Social Fiction (Ithaca:
                     Cornell University Press, 1988), as well as of Catherine Gallagher’s
                     The Industrial Reformation of English Fiction, 1832–1867 (Chicago:
                     University of Chicago Press, 1985), was Williams’s chapter on the
                     industrial novel in Culture and Society.
                8. Matthew Arnold, Culture and Anarchy (Cambridge: Cambridge
                     University Press, 1969), 100.
                9. Henry Mayhew, London Labour and the London Poor (New York: Dover,
                     1968), 1: 1–2.
              10. See Arnold, Chapter 3: “Barbarians, Philistines, Populace.”
              11. See Book 3, “The Modern Worker,” in Thomas Carlyle, Past and
                     Present, ed. Richard D. Altick (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1965).
              12. Carlyle, Past and Present, 185, 179.
              13. Arnold, Culture and Anarchy, 108, 123.
              14. For a similar account of this phenomenon see John Kucich, Imperial
                     Masochism: British Fiction, Fantasy, and Social Class (Princeton:
                     Princeton University Press, 2007), 12–16.
              Class
              AUDREY JAFFE
              D       ROR Wahrman compares it to a layer cake. Paul Fussell has said it
                      resembles a bus: the structure remains the same, even as individual
              riders come and go. David Cannadine makes the point that, rather than
              do away with earlier systems of rank and inheritance, the tripartite dis-
              tinctions so commonly invoked—upper, middle, and lower—reinforce
              them.1 The school system in Victorian England was organized into
              three “grades,” and the same structure (often tripartite) appears
              throughout social and economic life today: in education, in air and
              train travel, and in consumer culture. Rather than destroy the old
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:11, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000414

