                                                                                   DESCRIPTION, DIALECT                             649
                     Schmitt, “Interpret or Describe?” Representations 135, no. 1 (2016):
                     102–18.
                3.   William James, The Principles of Psychology, Vol. 2 (New York: Dover,
                     1918), 2 (emphasis original).
                4.   James, Principles, 78 (emphasis original).
                5.   See Ruth Bernard Yeazell, Picture Titles: How and Why Western Paintings
                     Acquired Their Names (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2015),
                     19–139.
                6.   William Stanley Jevons, “The Use and Abuse of Museums,” in The
                     Emergence of the Modern Museum: an Anthology of Nineteenth-Century
                     Sources, ed. Jonah Siegel (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008),
                     290; and George Brown Goode, “The Museums of the Future,”
                     (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1891), 433 (emphasis
                     original).
                7.   Vernon Lee, Belcaro: Being Essays on Sundry Aesthetical Questions
                     (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1887), 58–59.
                8.   Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures (New York: Basic Books,
                     1973), 30.
                9.   See Benjamin Morgan, The Outward Mind: Materialist Aesthetics in
                     Victorian Science and Literature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
                     2017), 219–54.
              10.    Gillian Beer, Darwin’s Plots: Evolutionary Narrative in Darwin, George
                     Eliot, and Nineteenth-Century Fiction (Cambridge: Cambridge
                     University Press, 2009), 6.
              Dialect
              TARYN HAKALA
              A      T the weekly meeting of the Manchester Literary Club on December
                      14, 1874, president George Milner read his essay “The Dialect of
              Lancashire Considered as a Vehicle for Poetry.” In it, he argues that
              the Lancashire dialect is not only more appropriate than but also supe-
              rior to Standard English for use in poetry. In defending this position,
              Milner cites Alfred Tennyson’s use of Anglo-Saxon diction and
              Matthew Arnold’s assertion “about simplicity being the supreme style,”
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000475

                    650          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    before turning William Wordsworth’s own argument from Lyrical Ballads
                    against him, by rendering “She Dwelt Among the Untrodden Ways” into
                    the Lancashire dialect. In Milner’s version, Wordsworth’s “But she is in
                    her grave, and, oh, / The difference to me!” becomes “But hoo’s i’th’
                    yearth, an’, oh, it’s browt / Another day to me!” With these changes,
                    Milner hopes to show that “delicate sentiments . . . can be transmitted
                    through the dialect without material injury” and that “the dialect can
                    compel an improvement.”1 Such bold claims may seem surprising to us
                    now, but these kinds of debates about dialect were not uncommon in
                    England in the mid- and late-nineteenth century.
                            Thanks in large part to the increase of interest in English philology
                    in the nineteenth century, regional varieties of English received
                    increased attention, and several glossaries of regional dialects were pub-
                    lished, culminating in Joseph Wright’s The English Dialect Dictionary
                    (1898). Even the much-maligned varieties of English spoken by the work-
                    ing classes of London were studied and defended: Samuel Pegge’s
                    Anecdotes of the English Language (1814, 1844) attempted to show that
                    “the natives of the metropolis and its vicinities have not corrupted the
                    language of their ancestors.”2 Pegge’s assertion is in response to the
                    stance of prescriptive grammars and pronunciation guides that also pro-
                    liferated during the period. The sale of these publications was fueled by
                    the desire of many speakers to adopt the prestige dialect, the non-
                    localized variety that would later be coined “Received Pronunciation.”
                    As Richard W. Bailey and Lynda Mugglestone have shown, in nineteenth-
                    century Britain, Standard English came to be regarded as not only the
                    desired norm but also as the “proper” and “correct” way to speak; in
                    direct correlation, other dialects and their speakers came to be viewed
                    not only as nonstandard but substandard.3
                            Alongside this proliferation of prescriptivism, however, we see a ver-
                    itable explosion in both the quantity and variety of uses of dialect in lit-
                    erature. Rather than erase dialect or relegate it to the literary margins,
                    prescriptivism helped fuel its use and defense. No longer reserved for
                    minor and comic characters, dialect in the nineteenth century was
                    increasingly used to represent the speech of heroes and heroines. For
                    example, in Elizabeth Gaskell’s Mary Barton (1848) and George Eliot’s
                    Adam Bede (1859) the potential for taking on the role of hero or heroine
                    is located in the use of regional dialects, rather than middle-class
                    Standard English.4 Other writers went even further in their representa-
                    tion of dialect, using it as a weapon against linguistic discrimination.
                    Robert Burns, who cast a long and wide shadow over dialect writing,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000475

                                                                                                               DIAL ECT             651
              was often evoked in these attempts, either as an analogue (Edwin Waugh
              was called “the Lancashire Burns”) or as a bête noire. In the November
              1871 issue of his periodical, Ben Brierley’s Journal, for example, dialect
              writer Ben Brierley offered a satirical take on the uneven treatment of
              English dialects in the humorous sketch, “Goosegrove Penny Readings.”
              In it, Brierley lampoons those who would venerate the Scots dialect
              while simultaneously denigrating the regional dialects of England.
              When the Aberdonian master of ceremonies, Mayor Macsarkin, takes
              over the program of the penny readings, he strikes out the “dialectal”
              readings. “Iverything [in the program] must be in proaper Henglish,”
              he explains, “sic as is written by our Scoatts, oor Burnses, an’ oor
              Shaksperes; mair parteclarly the first twa.”5 Macsarkin’s declaration is
              humorously hyperbolic, especially with his /h/-insertion (a social shibbo-
              leth). But even more than this, his insistence that Lowland Scots is not
              “dialuctal” trenchantly expresses the discrimination that English dialect
              speakers and writers repeatedly faced throughout the nineteenth century.
                      This is not to say, however, that Lowland Scots was immune to ridi-
              cule by Standard English speakers, nor does Brierley single out Lowland
              Scots in this sketch. After Macsarkin recites selections of Burns’s poetry,
              the Reverend Stiltford Priggins, a “Cambridge Scholar,” treats the audi-
              ence to a reading from Shakespeare’s Othello: “Mowest powtent, gwave,
              and wevewend Seignyaws. / My vewy nowble and appwoved good maw-
              staws. . . .”6 Laden with /r/-/w/ substitution, Priggins’s speech echoes
              not only that of Thackeray’s upper-class “Snobs” and Dickens’s Lord
              Mutanhead but also middle-class imitators of the aristocracy. Eliot held
              similar views about this linguistic double standard; in an 1872 letter to
              philologist Walter William Skeat in which she explains her representation
              of the North Warwickshire dialect in Silas Marner, she concedes that it is
              “a just demand that art should keep clear of such specialties as would
              make it a puzzle for the larger part of the public,” but goes on to pro-
              claim that “one is not bound to respect the lazy obtuseness or snobbish
              ignorance of people who do not care to know more of their native
              tongue than the vocabulary of the drawing-room and the newspaper.”7
                      The above examples barely scratch the surface of the depth of the
              debates surrounding dialect in the nineteenth century. Recent scholar-
              ship in dialect and literature aims to further explore these debates and
              the ideological implications of the representation of dialect in
              Victorian literature and culture. This scholarship is interdisciplinary in
              approach, drawing on recent developments in modern sociolinguistics
              to reevaluate the relationship between dialect and literature in this
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000475

                    652          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    complex period of literary and linguistic history. Jane Hodson’s recent
                    edited volume Dialect and Literature in the Long Nineteenth Century is just
                    one recent example.8 New directions include investigations of racialized
                    dialects of English in imperial contexts, such as David West Brown’s forth-
                    coming English and Empire: Literary History, Dialect and the Digital Archive.9 As
                    these studies reveal, the representation of dialect in literature has material
                    consequences. Around the globe, many nonstandard varieties of English
                    remain stigmatized and the speakers of those varieties continue to face dis-
                    crimination. Understanding the history of dialect representation and the
                    ideologies that undergird it can help us transform its future.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. George Milner, “The Dialect of Lancashire Considered as a Vehicle
                          for Poetry,” Papers of the Manchester Literary Club, Vol. 1 (Manchester:
                          John Heywood, 1875), 24–26.
                    2. Samuel Pegge, Anecdotes of the English Language; Chiefly Regarding the
                          Local Dialect of London and its Environs (London: J. B. Nichols and
                          Son, 1844).
                    3. Richard W. Bailey, Nineteenth-Century English (Ann Arbor: University of
                          Michigan Press, 1996); Lynda Mugglestone, Talking Proper: The Rise of
                          Accent as Social Symbol (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003).
                    4. Taryn Hakala, “Linguistic Self-Fashioning in Elizabeth Gaskell’s Mary
                          Barton,” in Dialect and Literature in the Long Nineteenth Century, ed. Jane
                          Hodson (New York: Routledge, 2017), 159.
                    5. Ben Brierley, “Goosegrove ‘Penny Readings,’” Ben Brierley’s Journal
                          (Nov. 1871): 295.
                    6. Brierley, “Goosegrove,” 295.
                    7. George Eliot, Letter to W. W. Skeat, quoted in English Dialect Society: A
                          Bibliographic List of the Works That Have Been Published, or Are Known to
                          Exist in Ms., Illustrative of the Various Dialects of English, ed. Walter
                          W. Skeat and J. H. Nodal (London: Trübner and Co., 1877), viii.
                    8. Jane Hodson, ed., Dialect and Literature in the Long Nineteenth Century
                          (New York: Routledge, 2017).
                    9. David West Brown, English and Empire: Literary History, Dialect and the
                          Digital Archive (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
                          forthcoming).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000475

