                                                                                                             E CO LOGY              653
              Ecology
              ELIZABETH CAROLYN MILLER
              I   N the postrevolutionary utopian society of William Morris’s 1890 novel
                   News from Nowhere, the English language has evolved to reflect the
              transformations of postcapitalist life, and “nature,” in the sense of the
              natural world, is a term understood to express an outdated capitalist ide-
              ology. One character named Clara reflects back on the nineteenth cen-
              tury “mistake” of “always looking upon everything, except mankind,
              animate and inanimate —‘nature,’ as people used to call it—as one thing,
              and mankind as another.” Such thinking, she says, led people to “try
              to make ‘nature’ their slave, since they thought ‘nature’ was something
              outside them.”1 Another character, Dick, explains, “I can’t look upon
              [the natural world] as if I were sitting in a theatre seeing the play
              going on before me . . . I am part of it all.”2 Morris’s lines advance an
              early socialist critique of capitalist appropriation of the natural world,
              but they also follow from decades of Victorian reimagining of “nature”
              and the human place within it. Such reimagining can be summed up
              in one word, a word with Victorian origins: ecology.
                      “Ecology” was coined in 1866 by Ernst Haeckel in his Generelle
              Morphologie der Organismen: “By ecology, we mean the whole science of
              the relations of the organism to the environment including, in the
              broad sense, all the ‘conditions of existence’.”3 The concept had become
              thinkable to Haeckel after reading Charles Darwin’s The Origin of Species
              (1859) in its German translation; thereafter, Haeckel became an enthu-
              siastic advocate of evolutionary theory, and with the term “ecology” he
              sought to articulate a Darwinian sense of the natural world as dynamic,
              interrelational, and fully inclusive of the human. This contrasted with
              an earlier vision of a fixed and unchanging “nature” governed by a “cre-
              ative and regulative power,” as the Oxford English Dictionary puts it.4
              “Ecology” recast the natural world in scientific rather than religious
              terms as evolving, relational, and holistic.
                      The idea of nature as static backdrop or handmaiden to human ambi-
              tion proved persistent, however, and arguably was even cemented by the
              nineteenth-century industrial revolution and its accelerating operations of
              extraction and despoliation. Just as new ecological theories of the natural
              world were coming to recognize the interdependence of its many parts, cap-
              italist technologies were perfecting capacities for the removal or derange-
              ment of these parts.5 Since then, acceleration has only accelerated, and
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000487

                    654          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    ecological thinking has still not fully permeated our language or our meth-
                    ods of critically analyzing language. While the science of ecology was
                    declared to have reached its “maturity” all the way back in 1955,6 and has con-
                    tinued to develop since, as recently as 2007 Tim Morton was still making the
                    literary-critical case against “nature” as “a transcendental term in a material
                    mask,” the semantic conveyor of an ideology responsible for inhibiting the
                    rise of a “genuinely ecological politics, ethics, philosophy, and art.”7
                    Meanwhile, even as we have failed to take on board a fully ecological under-
                    standing of the natural world, metaphorical ecology has pervaded other
                    domains of analysis as with the concept of “media ecology.”8
                            Where does “ecology” sit within literary criticism today? Ecocritics
                    have moved away from the “nature writing” formulation that dominated
                    earlier work, and “ecology” has now supplanted “nature,” ushering in a
                    more systematic understanding of the natural world. A critical perspec-
                    tive closely attentive to evolutionary science, climate science, and earth
                    systems science is apparent, for example, in recent work in Victorian stud-
                    ies by Allen MacDuffie, Heidi Scott, and Jesse Oak Taylor.9 But for many
                    recent critics, even the term “ecology” is now proving inadequate, for
                    while it usefully suggests dynamic interrelation, it can also convey bal-
                    ance, equilibrium, and health—a result, in part, of having been taken
                    up as a catchphrase in the twentieth-century environmental movement.10
                    “Ecology,” for this reason, may not be up to the task of representing envi-
                    ronmental crisis in the age of irreversible human impacts known as the
                    Anthropocene.11 A proliferation of new terms have thus emerged in
                    recent ecological critique: “natureculture” from Donna Haraway,
                    “oikeios” from Jason Moore, “dark ecology” from Tim Morton, and
                    “abnatural ecology” from Jesse Oak Taylor, all of which are meant to
                    express, in different ways, ecological relations with an eye to anthropo-
                    genic influence. Other critics are responding to the same state of affairs
                    by expanding the reach of ecological thought: Devin Griffiths, for exam-
                    ple, is developing a theory of ecological form to challenge the organic
                    model that pervades aesthetic theory. Influenced by “recent findings in
                    physiology, developmental biology, and epigenetics,” Griffiths argues
                    that “we need a more ecological notion of form—one that accounts
                    for form’s basic relationality—to figure out not only how something
                    like a novel works, but what novels can tell us about our current predic-
                    ament, and the crisis of collective agency that characterizes the
                    Anthropocene.”12 Griffiths traces his ecological notion of form back to
                    Darwin, but also brings it to bear on the failures of collectivity animating
                    our contemporary political scene.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000487

                                                                                                             E CO LOGY              655
                       “Ecology” is, in this sense, both a scientific term that emerged in the
              Victorian era to describe observable features of biological relations, and
              an ethic or principle of coexistence that developed over time through lit-
              erary and philosophical reflections on “ecology” as a vision of shared life.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. William Morris, News from Nowhere (Peterborough: Broadview, 2003),
                     219 (my emphasis).
                2. Morris, News, 245.
                3. For translation see Robert C. Stauffer, “Haeckel, Darwin, and
                     Ecology,” Quarterly Review of Biology 32, no. 2 (June 1957): 138–44,
                     140. For a more recent account of Haeckel’s relation to Darwin,
                     see Robert J. Richards, The Tragic Sense of Life: Ernst Haeckel and the
                     Struggle over Evolutionary Thought (Chicago: University of Chicago
                     Press, 2008).
                4. “nature, n.,” OED Online, Oxford University Press, http://www.oed.
                     com (accessed December 1, 2017).
                5. Haeckel’s work was taken up by nineteenth-century socialism, but
                     mainly for its secularism. Raymond Williams, “Socialism and
                     Ecology,” Capitalism, Nature, Socialism 1 (1995): 41–57, 41.
                6. See Lee R. Dice, “What Is Ecology?” The Scientific Monthly 80, no. 6
                     (June 1955): 346–55, 346.
                7. Tim Morton, Ecology without Nature: Rethinking Environmental Aesthetics.
                     (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007), 14.
                8. Ursula Heise describes how ecological thinking has been generative
                     for media theorists as “a mode of reasoning that foregrounds the
                     whole in its internal interconnectedness,” and yet she worries that
                     the “transfer of vocabulary . . . at least implicitly invites a perception
                     of media ecology as a replacement for biological ecology,” unless the
                     two spheres can be thought about together. Ursula Heise,
                     “Unnatural Ecologies: The Metaphor of the Environment in Media
                     Theory,” Configurations 10, no. 1 (Winter 2002): 149–68, 156, 164.
                9. See Allen MacDuffie, Victorian Literature, Energy, and the Ecological
                     Imagination (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014); Jesse
                     Oak Taylor, The Sky of Our Manufacture: The London Fog in British
                     Fiction from Dickens to Woolf (Charlottesville: University of Virginia
                     Press, 2016): Heidi C. M. Scott, Chaos and Cosmos: Literary Roots of
                     Modern Ecology in the British Nineteenth Century (University Park:
                     Pennsylvania State University Press, 2014).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000487

                    656          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    10. Heidi Scott sums up the problem with such a vision of natural bal-
                            ance: “ecological science has critiqued the balance paradigm as a
                            misleading, quasi-mystical construct that forces economic and
                            mechanical models on the obscure dynamics of ecological intercon-
                            nection” (Scott, Chaos and Cosmos, 2).
                    11. As is now widely known, earth systems scientists have introduced the
                            term “Anthropocene” to describe a new geological epoch marked by
                            irreversible human impacts. Some critics prefer “Capitalocene” to con-
                            vey that it was capitalism, not humanity per se, that brought the
                            Holocene to an end; others have proposed “Plantationocene” for its
                            attention to agricultural, forests, and human labor. On
                            Anthropocene, see Tobias Menely and Jesse Oak Taylor,
                            “Introduction,” in Anthropocene Reading: Literary History in Geologic
                            Times, ed. Tobias Menely and Jesse Oak Taylor (University Park:
                            Pennsylvania State University Press, 2017), 1–24. On Capitalocene,
                            see Andreas Malm, Fossil Capital: The Rise of Steam Power and the Roots
                            of Global Warming (London: Verso, 2016); Jason W. Moore, Capitalism
                            in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital (London:
                            Verso, 2015). On Plantationocene, see Donna J. Haraway, Staying with
                            the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene (Durham: Duke University
                            Press, 2016), 206.
                    12. Devin Griffiths, “The Ecology of Form,” lecture at Wheeler Hall,
                            University of California, Berkeley, November 13, 2017.
                    Education
                    LAURA GREEN
                    A       T the beginning of the nineteenth century, education in England
                             was provided by a motley assortment of institutions, some under
                    the aegis of the Church, none under the direct control of the state,
                    each aimed at a particular segment of the population—the working
                    poor (Ragged and Sunday Schools); middle- and upper-middle-class
                    boys (grammar and public schools) and, less consistently, girls (proprie-
                    tary schools); a tiny male elite (universities). By the end of the century,
                    elementary education was compulsory and state-supported; women
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000487

