                    656          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    10. Heidi Scott sums up the problem with such a vision of natural bal-
                            ance: “ecological science has critiqued the balance paradigm as a
                            misleading, quasi-mystical construct that forces economic and
                            mechanical models on the obscure dynamics of ecological intercon-
                            nection” (Scott, Chaos and Cosmos, 2).
                    11. As is now widely known, earth systems scientists have introduced the
                            term “Anthropocene” to describe a new geological epoch marked by
                            irreversible human impacts. Some critics prefer “Capitalocene” to con-
                            vey that it was capitalism, not humanity per se, that brought the
                            Holocene to an end; others have proposed “Plantationocene” for its
                            attention to agricultural, forests, and human labor. On
                            Anthropocene, see Tobias Menely and Jesse Oak Taylor,
                            “Introduction,” in Anthropocene Reading: Literary History in Geologic
                            Times, ed. Tobias Menely and Jesse Oak Taylor (University Park:
                            Pennsylvania State University Press, 2017), 1–24. On Capitalocene,
                            see Andreas Malm, Fossil Capital: The Rise of Steam Power and the Roots
                            of Global Warming (London: Verso, 2016); Jason W. Moore, Capitalism
                            in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital (London:
                            Verso, 2015). On Plantationocene, see Donna J. Haraway, Staying with
                            the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene (Durham: Duke University
                            Press, 2016), 206.
                    12. Devin Griffiths, “The Ecology of Form,” lecture at Wheeler Hall,
                            University of California, Berkeley, November 13, 2017.
                    Education
                    LAURA GREEN
                    A       T the beginning of the nineteenth century, education in England
                             was provided by a motley assortment of institutions, some under
                    the aegis of the Church, none under the direct control of the state,
                    each aimed at a particular segment of the population—the working
                    poor (Ragged and Sunday Schools); middle- and upper-middle-class
                    boys (grammar and public schools) and, less consistently, girls (proprie-
                    tary schools); a tiny male elite (universities). By the end of the century,
                    elementary education was compulsory and state-supported; women
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000499

                                                                                                        EDUCATION                   657
              were studying at universities across Britain; and extension schools aimed
              at working-class communities were flourishing. Education also func-
              tioned increasingly as a vehicle for exporting English ideology into colo-
              nial territories such as India. These changes, concentrated in the second
              half of the century, simultaneously expanded access to education and
              cemented its place in the edifice of class stratification. The wave of
              reform was borne on a flood of text: government reports; essays and man-
              ifestos; and representations of educational institutions in the era’s char-
              acteristic literary genre, the bildungsroman.
                      The government expanded its oversight of education through a
              series of councils and commissions recorded in copious reports. The
              Indian Council of Education’s investigation produced H. Babington
              Macaulay’s notorious 1835 “Minute [Memorandum] on Education,”
              arguing for the cultural superiority of English over native education.
              The Taunton Commission (1864–67), which investigated middle-class
              education, produced recommendations for the division of schools into
              three types, distinguished by leaving age (fourteen, sixteen, or eighteen)
              and emphasis on classical or “modern” curriculum. Matthew Arnold’s
              documentary study A French Eton: Middle-Class Education and the State, writ-
              ten for the commission, lauds state control of education as a means of
              achieving civic harmony; he perceives no tension between the goal of
              social cohesion and a system committed to social stratification. At the
              same time, however, he views existing efforts at institutional reform as
              expressing the spirit of a merely bureaucratic, rather than civically
              directed, state: “An English law for [education] is ruled by no clear
              idea of the citizen’s claim and the State’s duty, but has, in compensation,
              a mass of minute technical detail about the number of members on a
              school-committee, and how many shall be a quorum, and how they
              shall be summoned, and how often they shall meet.”1
                      Arnold’s ambivalence about English educational institutions was
              more than shared by many novelists, who often lacked his intimate expe-
              rience of them. An elite education was not required for a literary career,
              and much Victorian literature reflects the experience of authors for
              whom educational institutions, as observed or experienced, are at best
              irrelevant to growth and at worst abusive of their charges. Charles
              Dickens represents the exploitation of boys unprotected by privilege in
              the workhouse education in Oliver Twist and, at the more elevated social
              scale of the proprietary boarding school, in two nests of bullies,
              Dotheboys Hall in Nicholas Nickleby and Salem House in David
              Copperfield. Charlotte Brontë does the same for impoverished girls in
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000499

                    658          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Jane Eyre, where physical suffering and religious bullying are the formative
                    features of the young Jane’s educational experience at Lowood School.
                    That she learns enough to become a governess “qualified to teach the
                    usual branches of a good English education, together with French,
                    Drawing, and Music”2 is due largely to her individual relationship with
                    the saintly teacher Miss Temple. At the end of the century, in Thomas
                    Hardy’s Jude the Obscure, educational institutions continue to present
                    obstacles rather than opportunities for socially obscure intellectual
                    aspirants. Sue Bridehead is expelled for perceived immorality from her
                    teacher-training college, represented sardonically by Hardy as “a species
                    of nunnery . . . which included the daughters of mechanics, curates,
                    surgeons, shopkeepers, farmers, dairy-men, soldiers, sailors, and villag-
                    ers,” and a university don advises the ambitious Jude that “you will
                    have a much better chance in life by remaining in your own sphere
                    and sticking to your trade than by adopting any other course”3—advice
                    that does not avert his doom.
                            George Eliot approaches characters who view education as a form of
                    social advancement with more satire than sympathy. In Middlemarch,
                    Rosamond Vincy is “a sylph caught young and educated at Mrs.
                    Lemon’s” where “the teaching included all that was demanded in the
                    accomplished female—even to extras, such as the getting in and out of
                    a carriage.”4 In The Mill on the Floss, the provincial Tom Tulliver’s classical
                    education is ill-suited to his practical talents: “What was understood to be
                    his education, was simply the practice of reading, writing, and spelling,
                    carried on by an elaborate appliance of unintelligible ideas, and by
                    much failure in the effort to learn by rote.”5 Eliot is similarly dismissive
                    of university pretensions: “To think that this is a country where a
                    man’s education may cost hundreds and hundreds, and it turns you
                    out this!” snarls Caleb Garth in Middlemarch, contemplating the handwrit-
                    ing of Oxford dropout Fred Vincy.6
                            Anthony Trollope, while he does not appear to rate the intellectual
                    impact of an Oxbridge education much higher than Eliot (and did not
                    have one himself), is more respectful of its social impact. In Framley
                    Parsonage, Mark Robarts’s university experience is summarized in a single
                    sentence: “He lived with the best set—he incurred no debts—he was fond
                    of society, but able to avoid low society—liked his glass of wine, but was
                    never known to be drunk; and, above all things, was one of the most pop-
                    ular men in the university.”7 There is a connection between Trollope’s
                    urbane acceptance of the university as a locus of social rather than intel-
                    lectual attainment and his novels’ emphasis on social compliance rather
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000499

                                                                                                        EDUCATION                   659
              than individual assertion. It is not such middling virtuous protagonists as
              Mark Robarts, however, who become central to the Victorian literary
              canon but the more agonistic, isolated protagonist (Pip or Maggie or
              Jude), for whom educational institutions are largely ranged with the
              forces of social oppression.
                      English educational institutions remained vectors of stratification
              well into the twentieth century. The divisions embodied in the
              Taunton Commission received a new life in 1944 with the creation of
              the eleven-plus examination, which funneled students into grammar
              (elite), secondary modern, or technical schools, determining their edu-
              cational fates before they reached their teens. More recently, the long
              chronological and spatial reach of Victorian educational hegemony has
              appeared as a convention of the postcolonial coming-of-age novel,
              where schoolroom scenes recur in which protagonists are compelled to
              memorize               nineteenth-century                    English            poetry—often                   William
              Wordsworth’s “I wandered lonely as a cloud”—that embodies aesthetic
              and national values connected to the protagonist’s homeland only by
              the forces of Victorian empire.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Matthew Arnold, Culture and Anarchy, ed. Jane Garnett (New York:
                   Oxford University Press, 2008), 153.
              2. Charlotte Brontë, Jane Eyre, ed. Margaret Smith (New York: Oxford
                   University Press, 2009), 87.
              3. Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure, ed. Patricia Ingham (New York:
                   Oxford University Press, 2009), 134, 110.
              4. George Eliot, Middlemarch, ed. David Carroll (New York: Oxford
                   University Press, 2008), 150, 89
              5. George Eliot, The Mill on the Floss, ed. Gordon S. Haight (New York:
                   Oxford University Press, 2015), 160.
              6. Eliot, Middlemarch, 532.
              7. Anthony Trollope, Framley Parsonage, ed. Katherine Mullin and Francis
                   O’Gorman (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014), 5.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000499

