                                                                                          E M OTI O N S , EM P I R E                665
              I gratefully acknowledge the support of the Australian Research Council
              (Project CE110001011) and the Centre of Excellence for the History of
              Emotions.
              Empire
              RYAN D. FONG
              S     INCE the rise of postcolonial theory and criticism in the 1980s, it has
                     become commonplace within Victorian studies to understand empire
              as a necessary category of analysis. In drawing on the pathbreaking
              analyses of critics like Edward Said and Gayatri Spivak, our field has
              long recognized how imperialism and colonialism functioned as crucial
              backdrops to the literary and cultural output of nineteenth-century
              Britain. At the same time, much of the current scholarship on empire
              and Victorian literature has still, in practice, tended to replicate imperial
              priorities and the spatial logic of settler colonialism. Frequently in this
              work, Britain remains the assumed center, as texts published within or
              about the metropole occupy an assumed-privileged status. Often building
              upon Said’s influential method of “contrapuntal reading,” these analyses
              construct important arguments about empire that nonetheless remain
              grounded in a relatively limited range of sources. Thus, in Elaine
              Freedgood’s The Ideas in Things, for instance, empire reveals itself in
              the imperial things that appear in Brontë and Dickens.1 Or in Nathan
              Hensley’s Forms of Empire, he shows us how several British texts encode
              the foundational terms of sovereignty and violence within their aesthetic
              structures.2 Moreover, even when scholars have looked further afield and
              beyond the British Isles themselves, such as in Hensley’s chapter on
              Haggard or in Jason Rudy’s wide-ranging Imagined Homelands, white emi-
              grant or colonial writers frequently remain at the forefront, which leaves
              many issues and subjects in the margins even as they undertake the
              important work of recuperating authors and texts from understudied
              archives.3
                      Each of these books makes necessary interventions in our field, and
              their incisive and imaginative analyses have enriched our discussions of
              empire enormously. Nevertheless, their contributions mainly lie in how
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000517

                    666          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    they construct a more robust account of imperial and settler colonial ide-
                    ologies, in ways that keep our critical attentions firmly centered on those
                    who were engaged or complicit in the project of global expansion. While
                    this is not to say that these accounts are monolithic or simplistic—far
                    from it—they illustrate the prevailing limits that frequently frame our
                    objects of study when it comes to addressing the British empire, in
                    ways that continue to overlook the cultural output of those who were
                    occupied and colonized. Certainly there are exceptions to this rule—
                    with the work of Priya Joshi and Sukanya Banerjee offering two salient
                    and influential cases in point, in their penetrating analyses of nineteenth-
                    century Indian sources—but their exceptional status usefully illustrates
                    how Victorian studies still operates within a paradigm of empire that
                    might be postcolonial in a temporal sense, but not yet decolonized.4
                            I draw this language of decolonization from Indigenous studies, a
                    field whose contributions offer a compelling counter to this paradigm
                    and challenges its fundamental assumptions. In offering an approach
                    that, according to Chadwick Allen, explicitly centers “Indigenous con-
                    cerns and perspectives within academic research” and “localiz[es]
                    Indigenous theories and analytic methodologies,” it provides an emphat-
                    ically international and, in fact, antinational framework that dismantles
                    the binary of center and periphery itself.5 To do so, it “locates itself firmly
                    in the specificity of the Indigenous local while remaining always cogni-
                    zant of the complexity of the relevant Indigenous global,” by bringing
                    together the literary and cultural productions of peoples in the
                    Americas, Australia, and Africa, to name just a few, and articulating
                    how they operate both within and outside colonial structures and episte-
                    mologies.6 Furthermore, rather than seeking to gather these materials
                    under a single sign—in contrast to the much-critiqued category of
                    “world literature,” with its tendency to flatten difference—Indigenous
                    studies instead emphasizes theories and methods that think across
                    time, space, place, and language and that incorporate a full awareness
                    of the problematic limits that such comparisons create.
                            Incorporating these approaches within Victorian studies would allow
                    us to undertake the vital work of questioning the primacy of the British
                    canon and the often-unspoken assumption that it provides the most com-
                    pelling accounts of British imperialism. By forcing us to examine a much
                    wider corpus of writers and thinkers who actively engaged and resisted
                    colonial norms, as the recent work of Jane Stafford and Coll Thrush
                    has already begun to illustrate, Indigenous Studies would transform
                    how we conceptualize our archives and how we approach them.7 It
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000517

                                                                                                                 EMPIRE             667
              would not only help us expand our discussions to include authors that
              explicitly address or allude to nineteenth-century British and colonial
              texts—such as Sol Plaatje, E. Pauline Johnson, and Toru Dutt—but
              would also require that we interrogate and decolonize the boundaries
              that would delimit this new set of texts, in considering works beyond
              English and even beyond the medium of alphabetic print itself. Doing
              so would recognize the full range of indigenous cultural productions
              that took shape outside the literary, but within and alongside the context
              of colonialism nonetheless, including in oral culture, the visual arts and
              handicrafts, and various forms of dance and movement.
                      Certainly, making these moves is not without difficulty. Our field is a
              largely monolingual one, and the difficulties of working in multiple lan-
              guages or with translations present their own obstacles. The same is true
              in working across various forms of media and with modes of aesthetic
              expression that are, by definition, ephemeral and therefore absent from
              any written archive or present only in the highly mediated documents of
              colonial agents or observers. In this light, to center indigeneity might
              also require reconsidering the temporal boundaries of the Victorian as
              it has been traditionally defined, in recognizing how various indigenous
              communities define oral storytelling cultures as transtemporal in ways
              that connect ongoing contemporary practices with those that occurred
              in what we typically call the nineteenth century. In this sense, an account
              of indigeneity in Victorian studies would not only push us to develop a
              more diverse canon, but would also frame the contradictions and contin-
              gencies that I just outlined as the most urgent focus of our analyses rather
              than as their impediments. Thus, a move to indigeneity in Victorian stud-
              ies would not be characterized by an effort to recover an authentic indig-
              enous subject, but would follow the injunction of Standing Rock Sioux
              theorist Vine Deloria, Jr. of “we talk, you listen,” in order to question
              how the normative methods and materials in our field have created and
              perpetuated forms of silence and how we must develop new approaches
              that allow us to listen in different ways.8
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Elaine Freedgood, The Ideas in Things: Fugitive Meaning in the Victorian
                   Novel (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006).
              2. Nathan Hensley, Forms of Empire: The Poetics of Victorian Sovereignty
                   (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000517

                    668          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    3. Jason Rudy, Imagined Homelands: British Poetry in the Colonies
                          (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2017).
                    4. Priya Joshi, In Another Country: Colonialism, Culture and the Novel in India
                          (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002). See also Sukanya
                          Banerjee, Becoming Imperial Subjects: Indians in the Late-Victorian
                          Empire (Durham: Duke University Press, 2010).
                    5. Chadwick Allen, Trans-Indigenous: Methodologies for Global Native Literary
                          Studies (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012), xx.
                    6. Allen, Trans-Idigenous, xix.
                    7. Jane Stafford, Colonial Literature and the Native Author: Indigeneity and
                          Empire (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016). See also Coll
                          Thrush, Indigenous London: Native Travelers at the Heart of Empire
                          (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2016).
                    8. Vine Deloria, Jr., We Talk, You Listen: New Tribes, New Turf (Lincoln:
                          University of Nebraska Press, 1970).
                    Empire
                    WILL GLOVINSKY
                    E       MPIRE, like Flaubert’s ideal author, has a way of seeming everywhere
                            present yet scarcely visible in much Victorian literature. While review
                    sections of the field’s journals attest to robust interest in nineteenth-
                    century imperialism and settler colonialism, racial and “free trade” ideol-
                    ogies, cosmopolitanisms and oceanic rims, the significance of empire for
                    our reading of Victorian literature has remained more equivocal. Often
                    immured within a sub-canon of important but fairly familiar works,
                    empire—and especially its relation to literary forms and themes—can
                    seem to be a subject more easily discussed at a dedicated conference
                    panel than in an undergraduate survey hoping to demonstrate what is
                    particularly valuable or interesting about nineteenth-century literature,
                    and in particular the novel. Critics may agree that an empire based on
                    a massive, coerced drug trade, indigenous genocide, and the unfree
                    labor of millions was a key socioeconomic factor in nineteenth-century
                    British culture, but it can be difficult at times to see how this history fig-
                    ures in the novel canon’s conservative but resilient core of metropolitan,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000517

