                    668          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    3. Jason Rudy, Imagined Homelands: British Poetry in the Colonies
                          (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2017).
                    4. Priya Joshi, In Another Country: Colonialism, Culture and the Novel in India
                          (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002). See also Sukanya
                          Banerjee, Becoming Imperial Subjects: Indians in the Late-Victorian
                          Empire (Durham: Duke University Press, 2010).
                    5. Chadwick Allen, Trans-Indigenous: Methodologies for Global Native Literary
                          Studies (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012), xx.
                    6. Allen, Trans-Idigenous, xix.
                    7. Jane Stafford, Colonial Literature and the Native Author: Indigeneity and
                          Empire (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016). See also Coll
                          Thrush, Indigenous London: Native Travelers at the Heart of Empire
                          (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2016).
                    8. Vine Deloria, Jr., We Talk, You Listen: New Tribes, New Turf (Lincoln:
                          University of Nebraska Press, 1970).
                    Empire
                    WILL GLOVINSKY
                    E       MPIRE, like Flaubert’s ideal author, has a way of seeming everywhere
                            present yet scarcely visible in much Victorian literature. While review
                    sections of the field’s journals attest to robust interest in nineteenth-
                    century imperialism and settler colonialism, racial and “free trade” ideol-
                    ogies, cosmopolitanisms and oceanic rims, the significance of empire for
                    our reading of Victorian literature has remained more equivocal. Often
                    immured within a sub-canon of important but fairly familiar works,
                    empire—and especially its relation to literary forms and themes—can
                    seem to be a subject more easily discussed at a dedicated conference
                    panel than in an undergraduate survey hoping to demonstrate what is
                    particularly valuable or interesting about nineteenth-century literature,
                    and in particular the novel. Critics may agree that an empire based on
                    a massive, coerced drug trade, indigenous genocide, and the unfree
                    labor of millions was a key socioeconomic factor in nineteenth-century
                    British culture, but it can be difficult at times to see how this history fig-
                    ures in the novel canon’s conservative but resilient core of metropolitan,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:11, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000529

                                                                                                                 EMPIRE             669
              mid-century, more-or-less realist fiction. What, really, is the empire to
              Dorothea Brooke? Why parse indirect rule when there’s free indirect
              style?
                      It’s worth reflecting how much this state of affairs tells us about our
              own practices of canon formation, based as they are on aesthetic
              criteria of contemporary pleasurableness, density of meaning, and con-
              testability of interpretation, as well as academics’ generic preferences
              for realism over romance or “serious” over juvenile fiction. If literary
              critics hardly need reminding that such tastes classify the classifiers, the
              excising of colonial themes and preferences out of the canon—the
              neglect of nautical romancers like Frederick Marryat, or G. W. M.
              Reynolds, who outsold Dickens in India—should cause us to ask why so
              many authors who wrote about or were widely read in the colonies
              have been less congenial to academics.1
                      But a second and arguably more critically tractable force behind
              empire’s apparently equivocal relation to nineteenth-century novels
              may lie in the very methodologies and metaphors we use to apprehend
              the content of imperialism. In the early 1990s, for instance, several highly
              influential works construed empire in primarily spatial terms, as the
              properly geographic extension of political and economic power.
              Edward Said understandably premised his arguments in Culture and
              Imperialism on the paramount role of space—“the actual geographic pos-
              session of land”—in theorizing empire, and on the corresponding obser-
              vation that this imperial space is “only marginally visible” in most
              nineteenth-century fiction.2 It thus fell to the critic, Said wrote, “to
              draw out, extend, give emphasis and voice to what is silent or marginally
              present” in the novel.3 And, in a slightly earlier essay on modernist aes-
              thetics, Fredric Jameson so raised the spatial stakes of criticism as to
              make empire synonymous with an ungraspable geopolitical totality. For
              Jameson, “colonialism means that a significant structural segment of
              the economic system is now located elsewhere, beyond the metropolis.”4
              Critics of imperial literature should then read style (instanced by the
              Great Northern Road’s sublime “infinity” in Howards End) as the textual
              “marker and substitute” of the global “unrepresentable totality.”5
                      Following Said and Jameson, a body of remarkable scholarship has
              retraced empire’s previously neglected incursions into the canonical
              British novel in subplots of imperial travel, in the figure of the colonial
              émigré or returnee, and in the networks of colonial labor, commodities,
              and capital that underpin so-called domestic comfort. Understanding
              when and how the Victorian novel made imperial space visible through
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:11, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000529

                    670          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    such geopolitical systems remains a vital critical project, not least because
                    of recent work investigating how imperial “development” devastated and
                    transformed colonial environments. But redoubled attention to textual
                    glimpses of geopolitical totality can also militate against readings of the
                    novel as a whole in itself. As James Buzard has pointed out, “Not merely
                    hypersensitive scrutiny of the novel’s peripheries . . . but detailed formal
                    analysis of its central structures and language remains indispensable to a
                    globally conscious novel criticism.”6
                            It is perhaps no coincidence, then, that two important recent books
                    offer thought-provoking models for construing the immanence of
                    empire in the Victorian novel’s “central structures.” Nathan Hensley’s
                    engrossing Forms of Empire investigates how Victorian writers used the
                    resources of plot, narration, meter, and genre to not merely register
                    but also think through the juridical problems of liberal sovereignty and
                    imperial violence.7 In The Victorian Geopolitical Aesthetic, meanwhile,
                    Lauren Goodlad persuasively reveals the imperial-capitalist worldedness
                    of seemingly domestic fiction by tracing tropes of collapsed “heirloom”
                    sovereignty from Trollope’s Barsetshire to the adultery narratives of
                    Flaubert and Eliot.8
                            Goodlad and Hensley’s innovative approaches should prompt us to
                    develop others. What if we envisioned the nineteenth-century novel’s
                    engagement with empire not only as the quest for a totalized global sys-
                    tem but also as a more limited yet still socially significant “structure of
                    feeling”? How might we map the intimacies, affiliations, prejudices,
                    and conceptual problems that made empire however real and urgent it
                    was for the vast majority of Victorians whose work or travel never carried
                    them to overseas colonies? Such an approach may sound overmodest or
                    even quietist, yet dwelling on the nineteenth-century novel’s relative
                    reluctance to provide the totalized global view that twenty-first century
                    critics desire may in fact edge us closer to understanding what the art
                    we study and teach has to tell us about its imperial world. Even when
                    they neglect colonial space and its constitutive violence, canonical
                    Victorian novels may provide uniquely generative literary evidence of
                    imperialism as an affective turbulence, a question of fraught intimacy,
                    or a structure of self-alienation coiled within the conceit of omniscient
                    impersonality. Such avenues of inquiry can connect themes of empire
                    to those aspects of nineteenth-century British fiction that are most gener-
                    ically distinctive: to narrative form, the unspooling of characters’ psychol-
                    ogies, to casuistry and ethical commitment.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:11, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000529

                                                                                                                 EMPIRE             671
                      The reasons to renew our focus on empire and affect might include
              insights from the critically undervalued patterns of biography. Most reg-
              ulars of the nineteenth-century novel syllabus did not spend much time
              in Britain’s empire, yet nearly all had close family members who did:
              Austen had two brothers in the navy; Gaskell’s went missing in India;
              Dickens packed off two sons to India and another two to Australia;
              Trollope sent his eldest to New South Wales to raise sheep; Eliot helped
              establish G. H. Lewes’s sons in Natal. Reckoning with Victorian litera-
              ture’s failures and successes in writing the global entails understanding
              how empire for these novelists (as for millions of their contemporaries)
              was a family affair, its affective range spanning distant intimacy, the vicar-
              ious careerism of hopeful middle-class parents, the gamble (or 5% guar-
              antee) of colonial investments, the bigoted anxiety over mixed-race
              marriages. As work by Leela Gandhi, Tanya Agathocleous, Nancy
              Henry, and Deirdre David demonstrates, thinking about affect, disaffec-
              tion, domesticity, and gender in relation to empire can illuminate
              nineteenth-century literature and culture while also helping us to per-
              ceive the lived structures of imperial experience and colonial resistance.9
              If these forms of actually existing imperial consciousness fail to reassem-
              ble the British world-system’s economic totality or make invisible global
              space visible, they can return us to what makes the Victorian novel beat
              by showing how, in the nineteenth century, the personal was already
              geopolitical.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Priya Joshi, In Another Country: Colonialism, Culture, and the English Novel
                   in India (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002), 35.
              2. Edward W. Said, Culture and Imperialism (New York: Vintage, 1994), 78,
                   63.
              3. Said, Culture, 66.
              4. Fredric Jameson, “Modernism and Imperialism,” in The Modernist
                   Papers (London: Verso, 2007), 157.
              5. Said, Culture, 163.
              6. James Buzard, Disorienting Fiction: The Autoethnographic Work of
                   Nineteenth-Century British Novels (Princeton: Princeton University
                   Press, 2009), 42.
              7. Nathan K. Hensley, Forms of Empire: The Poetics of Victorian Sovereignty
                   (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:11, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000529

                    672          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    8. Lauren M. E. Goodlad, The Victorian Geopolitical Aesthetic: Realism,
                          Sovereignty, and Transnational Experience (Oxford: Oxford University
                          Press, 2015).
                    9. Leela Gandhi, Affective Communities: Anticolonial Thought, Fin-De-Siècle
                          Radicalism, and the Politics of Friendship (Durham: Duke University
                          Press, 2006); Tanya Agathocleous, “‘The Coming Clash of East and
                          West’: Syncretism, Cosmopolitanism, and Disaffection in the
                          Colonial Public Sphere,” Textual Practice 31, no. 4 (2017): 661–85;
                          Nancy Henry, George Eliot and the British Empire (Cambridge:
                          Cambridge University Press, 2006); and Deirdre David, Rule
                          Britannia: Women, Empire, and Victorian Writing (Ithaca: Cornell
                          University Press, 1995).
                    Enclosure
                    ZACH FRUIT
                    F      ROM the right angle, land enclosure takes on the aspect of the root
                           of capitalist accumulation. Marx, while suspicious of origin stories,
                    famously identifies land enclosure, and the nascent statist tactics of “con-
                    quest, enslavement, robbery, murder, in short, force” that accompany
                    it, as the “original sin” of “so-called primitive accumulation.”1 Many his-
                    torians have identified British land enclosure as a crucial aspect of
                    the eighteenth-century rise of industrial capitalism, while differently the-
                    orizing the relationship between the productive dynamics of English agri-
                    culture and the multinational circulation of capital.2 J. M. Neeson has
                    given the most textured account of the enclosure of the commons as a
                    decentralized process of expropriation that occasioned a complex array
                    of resistance, ambivalence, and compromise.3 The agricultural “improve-
                    ments” that accompanied enclosure also seem to be imbricated in the
                    enforced migration of agricultural laborers into urban centers and the
                    increasing rate of mechanization that led to the industrial revolution.4
                    Perhaps undertheorized, however, are the visual and aesthetic effects
                    of enclosure, and the innovative literary methodologies that metabolized
                    and disrupted these material transformations. Approaching enclosure as
                    an aesthetic phenomenon rather than an economic process allows for a
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:11, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000529

