                                                                                                   E NV I RO NM E N T               681
              15. Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern, trans. Catherine Porter
                     (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 10.
              16. Charles Dickens, Our Mutual Friend (New York: Penguin, 1998),
                     683–84.
              Environment
              ALLEN MACDUFFIE
              T      HE story of the coinage and popularization of the word environment
                     in its modern sense runs through some of the towering intellectual
              figures of the Victorian period—Thomas Carlyle, Harriet Martineau, G.
              H. Lewes, and Herbert Spencer—and their continental influences,
              Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Auguste Comte. In some ways, it is a
              story that bears directly upon the wholesale rethinking of the conven-
              tional divide between nature and culture that went on in many disci-
              plines over the course of the century, a conceptual shift that has roots
              in German and British Romantic thought, and finds scientific theoriza-
              tion in the work of Charles Darwin. But it’s also a story about the compli-
              cations and difficulties involved in reimagining the relationship between
              these two crucial categories, and the way racial, imperial, and economic
              ideologies blunted or even subverted the new conceptual possibilities for
              ecological thinking that the term environment both reflected and helped
              generate.
                      It seems fitting that the word “environment” would first appear in its
              modern guise in 1828, at the dawn of the period that would produce the
              factory town and the railroad, the Coal Question and the Great Guano
              Rush, Tess of the d’Urbervilles and Wuthering Heights, and, for many contem-
              porary critics, the first observable signs of the Anthropocene. Carlyle first
              uses it in his essay Goethe to translate the master’s original German
              Umgebung and to signify not merely surroundings or context (as it had
              been commonly used before) but rather the vital, ongoing influence of
              those surroundings upon a person or thing.1 As Ralph Jessop argues,
              this coinage arises from the “counter-Enlightenment” stance Carlyle
              took against the forces of mechanization and mechanical thinking: envi-
              ronment is an attempt to convey something of the holistic, “dialogical
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000554

                    682          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    [and] open-textured” set of influences—physical, social, intellectual,
                    spiritual—at work upon someone.2 We can thus see in it the stirrings
                    of an interdependent, “green” sensibility, though always filtered through
                    Carlyle’s peculiar metaphysical division of “substance” from “semblance”
                    and his quasi-reactionary politics.
                            Despite the usefulness of the word—its flexibility, its capaciousness, its
                    ability to suggest the porous and shifting boundaries of self—Carlyle
                    employed it relatively sparingly in his writing, and the term did not
                    catch on. For its popularization, we have Herbert Spencer to thank. As his-
                    torian of science Trevor Pearce argues, Spencer was introduced to the
                    term via Comte’s Cours de Philosophie Positive as translated by Harriet
                    Martineau, who herself may have been drawing on Carlyle.3 Spencer’s
                    switch from the word circumstances to environment, and his reliance on
                    the latter in his popular Principles of Psychology, Pearce argues, initiated a
                    crucial shift: “The successive transitions from individuated particular fac-
                    tors (e.g., ‘climate’), to a general plural term (e.g., ‘circumstances’), to
                    a general singular term (e.g., ‘environment’), correspond to a progressive
                    concealment of the different elements that make up the world outside the
                    organism and the relations between these elements . . . [T]he singular
                    term ‘environment,’ like ‘organism,’ is an important heuristic for biologists,
                    insofar as it gives them a way to talk about general causes without exploring
                    the details of micro-level complexity (the term ‘natural selection’ is a par-
                    allel case). Hence, the word ‘environment’ does metaphysical work.”4
                            One of the ironies of the term, then, is that it was precisely in its
                    abstraction from the material details of actually existing environments
                    that it became most useful to thinking ecologically about those environ-
                    ments. Although binaries like organism/environment can themselves be
                    problematic, as Timothy Morton has argued, they were conceptually pro-
                    ductive for the nascent science of ecology, and Spencer’s work had a tre-
                    mendous influence upon many significant early twentieth-century thinkers
                    in this field, including Frederic Clements and Victor Shelford.5 From here
                    we are but a short distance to the next, encompassing level of abstraction,
                    “the environment,” which the Oxford English Dictionary dates to 1948, and
                    which signifies something like “the natural world” but always with the
                    added implied possibility of human activity and disruption.
                            Spencer’s “environment” included not only physical and biological
                    factors, but social and political ones as well; as he makes clear in essays
                    like “The Social Organism” and throughout Principles of Psychology, his
                    aim was to break down the distinctions between the human and the
                    “natural” world. As recent ecological criticism and philosophy has
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000554

                                                                                                   E NV I RO NM E N T               683
              shown, questioning the conceptual divide between nature and culture is
              necessary, because (among other things) it helps make clear the extent
              to which a civilization’s cultural forms and practices depend entirely
              upon natural resources, processes, and conditions, and gives the lie to
              mystifying fantasies of human transcendence of the material world. But
              although Spencer is second perhaps only to Darwin among nineteenth-
              century thinkers who helped undermine this binary, it’s also true that the
              encompassing abstraction “environment” allowed him to reinforce other
              kinds of problematic distinctions. The natural world and human civiliza-
              tion may both be considered “environments,” but in Spencer’s system the
              latter is at a further stage of evolutionary “complexity,” and thus it func-
              tions as a stimulus to even more profound kinds of intellectual, moral,
              and social growth.6 And civilization, as Raymond Williams has shown,
              had not yet been relativized by the widespread adoption of its plural
              form: for Spencer, it means Western civilization.7 Thus, such develop-
              mentalist arguments reflect the way the concept “environment” was
              inflected by assumptions of racial and cultural superiority; indeed, as
              George Stocking notes, to be an “environmentalist” in Victorian anthro-
              pological circles was to believe in the profound shaping power of external
              forces upon human characteristics and capacities and, more often than
              not, to uphold the ascendancy of European culture on such grounds.8
                      Moreover, the complete continuity of nature and civilization also
              makes Spencer—at least in his early writings—famously wary of any “arti-
              ficial” human intervention in economic and social processes. It is thus a
              rather bleak irony that this important “environmental” writer was also
              England’s most well-known advocate for laissez-faire capitalism, an
              approach to markets, natural resources, and social relations that had,
              and continues to have, environmentally catastrophic consequences.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Leo Spitzer, “Milieu and Ambience: An Essay in Historical Semantics,”
                   Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 3, no. 2 (1942): 169–218, 204;
                   Lowell Frye, “History as Biography, Biography as History,” in Thomas
                   Carlyle Resartus: Reappraising Carlyle’s Contribution to the Philosophy,
                   History, Political Theory and Cultural Criticism, ed. Paul Kerry and
                   Marylu Hill (Madison: Farleigh Dickinson University Press, 2010):
                   133–147, 144.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000554

                    684          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    2. Ralph Jessop, “Coinage of the Term Environment: A Word Without
                          Authority and Carlyle’s Displacement of the Mechanical Metaphor,”
                          Literature Compass 9/11 (2012): 708–20, 713.
                    3. Trevor Pearce, “From ‘Circumstances’ to ‘Environment’: Herbert
                          Spencer and the Origins of The Idea of Organism-environment
                          Interaction,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
                          Biomedical Sciences 41 (2010): 241–52, 247–48.
                    4. Eliot, Middlemarch, 249.
                    5. Donald Worster, Nature’s Economy: A History of Ecological Ideas
                          (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977), 214–15.
                    6. Herbert Spencer, “Progress: Its Law and Cause,” in Essays, Scientific,
                          Political, and Speculative (New York: D. Appleton, 1916), 51.
                    7. Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society
                          (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983), 58–59.
                    8. George Stocking, Race, Culture, and Evolution: Essays in the History of
                          Anthropology (New York: Free Press, 1968), 48, 64.
                    Ethics
                    DUC DAU
                    T       HE late 1980s witnessed the ethical turn in literature, with notable
                            scholars being J. Hillis Miller, Wayne Booth, and Martha
                    Nussbaum.1 Recent studies of Victorian narrative have explored ethics
                    as a relation between self and other through a lens of sociality and open-
                    ness to otherness. In this essay, I would like to focus on studies on the
                    ethics of care, sympathy, hospitality, and empathy before turning to
                    underexplored areas of research.
                            In the past few years, scholars have turned their attention to the
                    analysis of ethics and the marriage plot, with the coming together of
                    wife and husband “marking a larger reconciliation between individual
                    and society.”2 Talia Schaffer’s study, Romance’s Rival: Familiar Marriage
                    in Victorian Fiction, explores, among other things, the marriage of a phys-
                    ically disabled person through the theory of ethics of care, which asserts
                    that human relations should be understood as interdependent
                    exchanges of caregiving and care-receiving. By drawing attention to a
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000554

