                    684          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    2. Ralph Jessop, “Coinage of the Term Environment: A Word Without
                          Authority and Carlyle’s Displacement of the Mechanical Metaphor,”
                          Literature Compass 9/11 (2012): 708–20, 713.
                    3. Trevor Pearce, “From ‘Circumstances’ to ‘Environment’: Herbert
                          Spencer and the Origins of The Idea of Organism-environment
                          Interaction,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
                          Biomedical Sciences 41 (2010): 241–52, 247–48.
                    4. Eliot, Middlemarch, 249.
                    5. Donald Worster, Nature’s Economy: A History of Ecological Ideas
                          (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977), 214–15.
                    6. Herbert Spencer, “Progress: Its Law and Cause,” in Essays, Scientific,
                          Political, and Speculative (New York: D. Appleton, 1916), 51.
                    7. Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society
                          (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983), 58–59.
                    8. George Stocking, Race, Culture, and Evolution: Essays in the History of
                          Anthropology (New York: Free Press, 1968), 48, 64.
                    Ethics
                    DUC DAU
                    T       HE late 1980s witnessed the ethical turn in literature, with notable
                            scholars being J. Hillis Miller, Wayne Booth, and Martha
                    Nussbaum.1 Recent studies of Victorian narrative have explored ethics
                    as a relation between self and other through a lens of sociality and open-
                    ness to otherness. In this essay, I would like to focus on studies on the
                    ethics of care, sympathy, hospitality, and empathy before turning to
                    underexplored areas of research.
                            In the past few years, scholars have turned their attention to the
                    analysis of ethics and the marriage plot, with the coming together of
                    wife and husband “marking a larger reconciliation between individual
                    and society.”2 Talia Schaffer’s study, Romance’s Rival: Familiar Marriage
                    in Victorian Fiction, explores, among other things, the marriage of a phys-
                    ically disabled person through the theory of ethics of care, which asserts
                    that human relations should be understood as interdependent
                    exchanges of caregiving and care-receiving. By drawing attention to a
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000566

                                                                                                                  ETHICS            685
              social rather than a medical understanding of disability, Schaffer encour-
              ages readers to shift away from diagnosis, towards the relationship
              between carer and cared-for. Victorian novels of the disabled person
              and the caretaker offer models of the interdependencies on which all
              human relations rest. Thus, what the male disabled character of
              Victorian fiction loses in autonomy, he gains in sociality. Excluded
              from the male world of self-interested striving, he is introduced to a
              female-associated system of mutual caretaking. For instance, Rochester
              spends much of Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyre trying to trick or overpower
              the titular character, but only when he is disabled can he express his
              dependency; his weakened male body facilitates mutual social relations.3
                      Like Schaffer, Rachel Ablow looks at ethics in the context of the
              marriage plot in The Marriage of Minds: Reading Sympathy in the Victorian
              Marriage Plot. She is less interested in sympathy as an emotion than “as
              a mode of relating to others and of defining a self.”4 Ablow demonstrates
              that, for many Victorians, the novel, like the effect of a good wife on her
              husband, helps readers maintain and cultivate their best selves. Her work
              on the morality of the domestic sphere addresses the ways by which the
              marriage plot serves to reinforce a moral code based on sympathy,
              whereby the home represents a private space of mutual understanding
              between spouses as well as one of respite from the corruption of the
              marketplace.
                      Rachel Hollander’s Narrative Hospitality in Late Victorian Fiction: Novel
              Ethics builds on Ablow’s study in order to argue that, in the last third of
              the nineteenth century, an ethics based on sympathy “gives way to an eth-
              ics of hospitality, in which respecting the limits of knowledge and welcom-
              ing the stranger define fiction’s relationship to both reader and world.”5
              Hollander’s understanding of hospitality derives from Emmanuel
              Levinas’s philosophy to indicate the individual’s welcome of the absolute
              other. Given this, Hollander looks at novels that call into question the
              stability of domestic life. Characters are now forced to look beyond sympa-
              thy to the possibilities of opening self and home to that which is other.
              Thus, in George Eliot’s Daniel Deronda, Daniel’s marriage heralds not a sta-
              ble English home but a journey to the Middle East and the consequent
              abandonment of England as homeland.6
                      Like Hollander, Rebecca N. Mitchell draws on Levinas, for whom
              ethics entails one’s responsibility for the (unknowable) other. In
              Victorian Lessons in Empathy and Difference, Mitchell reframes conventional
              understandings of Victorian empathy by arguing that it is not identifica-
              tion but the recognition of irreducible alterity that forms the basis of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000566

                    686          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    intersubjectivity and ethics in realist narratives and paintings. Indeed,
                    texts by Charles Dickens, George Eliot, and Thomas Hardy work to dis-
                    abuse readers of the tendency to view characters as human and know-
                    able. It is in being aware of the limits of our ability to know the other
                    that we seek to understand the other as best we can: “empathetic exten-
                    sion arises from the recognition of difference.”7 Realist novels and paint-
                    ings show individuals growing into the recognition of alterity “by learning
                    to appreciate difference.”8
                            The studies mentioned have focused almost exclusively on secular
                    fiction. As a result, there is still much research to be conducted on ethics
                    in other genres such as Victorian poetry and devotional verse. For exam-
                    ple, in my book on Gerard Manley Hopkins, I write about one’s ethical
                    obligation towards the other, but under the theme of love.9 Love is
                    undoubtedly an important goad for ethical action. Ignatius of Loyola
                    (founder of the Society of Jesus, which Hopkins entered in 1868), argued
                    that love (amor) is given “in mutual interchange,”10 most often in deeds,
                    that is, in ethical acts. I explored these ideals of mutual love through
                    Luce Irigaray’s theory of mutual touch. Irigaray speaks of the ethical rela-
                    tionship between the sexes as an enactment of what she calls the caress.
                    The caress expresses one’s regard for the alterity of the other. “Distanced
                    by our difference,” she says, “but present to each other,” with the caress
                    fulfilling an obligation in the act of loving: to be ourselves and to be “pre-
                    sent” with the other.11 Hopkins’s poetry demonstrates that love and
                    touch are two sides of each other; in “Felix Randal,” two very different
                    men, a priest and his dying, working-class parishioner, arrive at a tender
                    moment of trust, comfort, and love: “My . . . touch had quenched thy
                    tears, / Thy tears that touched my heart” (lines 10–11).
                            The turn to ethics has brought exciting new ways of reading
                    Victorian fiction. It has offered us greater insight into the lives of
                    women, the marginalized, and indeed the other. The future of studies
                    in ethics has the potential to further delve into territories less familiar,
                    for instance, love, poetry, and the intersection of literature with religion.
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. J. Hillis Miller, The Ethics of Reading: Kant, de Man, Eliot, Trollope, James,
                            and Benjamin (New York: Columbia University Press, 1987); Wayne
                            C. Booth, The Company We Keep: An Ethics of Fiction (Berkeley:
                            University of California Press, 1988); Martha Craven Nussbaum,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000566

                                                                                         ETHICS, EVO LU TION                        687
                     Love’s Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and Literature (New York: Oxford
                     University Press, 1990).
                2.   Rachel Hollander, Narrative Hospitality in Late Victorian Fiction: Novel
                     Ethics (London: Routledge, 2013), 5.
                3.   Talia Schaffer, Romance’s Rival: Familiar Marriage in Victorian Fiction
                     (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016), 161.
                4.   Rachel Ablow, Marriage of Minds: Reading Sympathy in the Victorian
                     Marriage Plot (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2007), 2.
                5.   Hollander, Narrative Hospitality, 1.
                6.   Hollander, Narrative Hospitality, 7.
                7.   Rebecca N. Mitchell, Victorian Lessons in Empathy and Difference
                     (Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 2011), 2.
                8.   Mitchell, Victorian Lessons, 3
                9.   Duc Dau, Touching God: Hopkins and Love (London: Anthem Press,
                     2012).
              10.    Gerard Manley Hopkins, The Sermons and Devotional Writings of Gerard
                     Manley Hopkins, ed. Christopher Devlin (London: Oxford University
                     Press, 1959), 192.
              11.    Luce Irigaray, To Be Two, trans. Monique M. Rhodes and Marco
                     F. Cocito-Monoc (London: Athlone Press, 2000), 11.
              Evolution
              KATHLEEN FREDERICKSON
                      HARLES Darwin famously does not use the word “evolution” in the
              C       first edition of On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or
              the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life (1859). Only with the
              sixth edition of 1872 does Origin mention the word. Reflecting on evolu-
              tion’s altered status as a legitimate scientific principle, Darwin writes that
              “things are wholly changed, and almost every naturalist admits the great
              principle of evolution.”1 As a younger man, he had seen both naturalist
              and non-naturalist friends be skeptical, dismissive, or wary of earlier evo-
              lutionary hypotheses; by 1872, among naturalists at least, natural selec-
              tion might be contentious, but evolution itself was not.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000566

