                                                                                    E VO L U T I ON , F E M I N I S M               691
                     seeks to emphasize that Darwin responds to Galton by noting that
                     “men did not differ much in intellect” (George Levine, Darwin and
                     the Novelists [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988], 182).
              10.    Sylvia Wynter, “Unsettling the Coloniality of Being/Power/Truth/
                     Freedom: Towards the Human, After Man, Its Overrepresentation
                     —An Argument,” CR: The New Centennial Review 3, no. 3 (2003):
                     257–337, 319.
              11.    Diane Paul notes that “few professional historians believe either that
                     Darwin’s theory leads directly to these doctrines or that they are
                     entirely unrelated” (Diane B. Paul, “Darwin, Social Darwinism and
                     Eugenics,” in The Cambridge Companion to Darwin [Cambridge:
                     Cambridge University Press, 2009], 214).
              12.    Nihad Farooq, Undisciplined: Science, Ethnography, and Personhood in the
                     Americas, 1830–1940 (New York: New York University Press, 2016), 44.
                     Cannon Schmitt highlights that “Victorian science and empire are
                     inextricable” at the same time as the theories that evolutionary scien-
                     tists developed also could “disallow . . . the solidity necessary for easily
                     held conviction as to their difference, superiority or right to rule”
                     (Cannon Schmitt, Darwin and the Memory of the Human: Evolution,
                     Savages, and South America [Cambridge: Cambridge University
                     Press, 2009], 11).
              13.    Marwa Elshakry, Reading Darwin in Arabic, 1860–1950 (Chicago:
                     University of Chicago Press, 2013), 225.
              Feminism
              ALISON BOOTH
              I   S there a scholar who does not dream of shaping public discourse, of
                   changing the history of a discipline, and more, of society? As we
              deplore the marginalization of the humanities and the silencing of pub-
              lic intellectuals, it might help to take a longer view of predecessors who
              had that coveted impact over time. I’m certainly not saying, “Recover the
              worthies.” We can see the blind spots of reform movements 1830s–1920s,
              and again in the 1970s–90s. But in the #MeToo moment, we should hit
              the refresh button. In this brief contribution, I want to remind Victorian
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800058X

                    692          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    studies not to take feminism, gender, and sexuality for granted. Recent
                    overviews of the field have charged Victorianists with neglecting theory
                    and critique, and I would add feminism. I propose that we think back
                    through Victorianist and feminist arrival in English departments, and
                    rethink the structures of period, nationality, and genre. Doing so
                    would allow us to focus more clearly on nineteenth-century women’s
                    advocacy through writing, lecturing, and the literary, learned, and phil-
                    anthropic clubs that were often segregated by race as well as sex and
                    class. It is not a history of straightforward progress or inheritance. The
                    archeology of disciplines does not keep earlier layers intact, but let’s
                    try to be aware of how we necessarily select and discard from the collec-
                    tions and assessments earlier experts leave behind.
                            What is the state of Victorian studies, and why does it need to appre-
                    ciate a history of women who publish and lecture on social causes? The
                    judges of the 2016 annual book prize of the North American Victorian
                    Studies Association, Catherine Gallagher and Herbert Tucker, pointed
                    out a prevalent theme among finalists—science—when they presented
                    the award at the NAVSA conference in Banff in November 2017.
                    Gallagher, prominent in the materialist New Historicism that prevailed
                    near the end of the twentieth century, surveyed the spirit of the year’s
                    rigorous studies and found it ideologically quiescent. Gallagher remem-
                    bers, without nostalgia, when studies of nineteenth-century disciplines
                    would punish more, would exert more suspicion. Today’s interdisciplin-
                    ary studies undertake work needful in our time, the Darwinian
                    Anthropocene in which man is no longer the center. But Theory, evi-
                    dently, is only a backup toolkit. Gallagher seemed bemused that so
                    much had been taken for granted. A few years ago, the V21 Collective
                    was more exasperated than bemused at the current state of the field.
                    The first thesis of their manifesto claims that “Victorian Studies has
                    fallen prey to positivist historicism . . . that aims to do little more than
                    exhaustively describe, preserve, and display the past.” In other theses,
                    the collective authors call for both “formalist interpretations that are
                    politically astute and intellectually supple,” and “presentism.”1 While
                    Gallagher and V21 are open to varied methodologies, they rightly per-
                    ceive choices and costs in the turn to histories of cultural forms and
                    knowledge systems. But, both narratives omit an approach that has
                    been simultaneously formalist, historical, theoretical, and politically
                    aimed at the present: feminist Victorian studies. This paradigm has
                    not been idle, though it does not fit into the either/or of description
                    v. theory, and it is not getting headlines. Does it go without saying that
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800058X

                                                                                                            FEMINISM                693
              the winner of the prize, Talia Schaffer’s Romance’s Rival: Familiar Marriage
              in Victorian Fiction, is kissing cousins with 1990s feminist studies?2
              Literature and academic fields have their kinship structures too.
              Elizabeth Barrett Browning wrote in a letter to Henry Chorley on 7
              January 1845: “I look everywhere for Grandmothers and see none. It is
              not in the filial spirit I am deficient,” she assures Chorley.3 Feminist crit-
              ics could look everywhere for daughters and granddaughters, and find
              some like Schaffer who keep up the family ties (as in the conference
              she co-organized in 2017, The Woman Card).4 But, descendants of fem-
              inist Victorian studies do not show a great deal of filial spirit. Thinking
              back through our mothers, as Virginia Woolf so well illustrated, can
              both inspire and stifle.
                      I don’t want to echo Madeleine Albright’s misfired jest in Hillary
              Clinton’s campaign about a special place in hell for women who don’t
              help other women. Newer scholars need to find new ways, but awareness
              of past struggles can help prepare for emerging ones. Remember how
              marginalized Victorian history, art, and literature once were. Before
              and after 1957, when Victorian Studies was launched as a journal and for-
              malism was in the ascendant, English departments expressed little
              warmth toward Victorian literature, and American literature as well.
              Both Victorian studies and American studies had to concede to
              Romanticists and Renaissance scholars the brilliance of their (male)
              poets, dramatists, and the theorists and critics who cut their teeth on
              them. Influential midcentury critics, looking for authenticity and desire
              as well as iconic texts, regarded the nineteenth century as an overstuffed
              nest of didacticism, kitsch narrative poetry and painting, sentiment and
              melodrama, and cloaked piano legs. To claim the validity that founds
              academic careers, Victorian studies turned to intellectual, political, and
              publishing history as well as writings of all kinds, not just belles lettres
              (for example, works by Walter Houghton, Raymond Williams, and
              Richard Altick);5 detecting that Victorians had sex also helped (for
              example, The Other Victorians).6 (Most of these foundational books are
              reissued in more recent editions.) But what really opened a reliable
              pipeline of students into the field was feminist criticism and theory.
              This looks easy now, as no one had forgotten George Eliot or
              Charlotte Brontë or Emily Dickinson. But remember the plausibility of
              Ann Douglass’s The Feminization of the American Mind,7 hostile to the
              female world of love and ritual that Sharon Marcus and Schaffer can
              now reassess.8 The first counter-move to the denigration of scribbling
              women was to use the master’s tools, the training in formalist
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800058X

                    694          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    comparative literature and psychoanalytic theory, to advocate a few great
                    women writers, not a class action suit for all nineteenth-century women.
                    Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar offered close yet suspicious reading of
                    Jane Eyre or Jane Austen to compete with Harold Bloom’s The Anxiety of
                    Influence.9 The ground-breaking literary histories by Ellen Moers and
                    Elaine Showalter and others were quickly embroiled in French feminist
                    theory and challenges from lesbians, Marxists, and women of color.10
                    The goal quickly moved beyond terms of equality for an elite, and the
                    search for women of the past who were prophetically aware of our prin-
                    ciples soon gave way to more complicated and diverse portraits.
                            If Victorian studies was bolstered by feminist studies of women writ-
                    ers, it was because women had gained access to higher education. Recall
                    how much it cost in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries to gain such
                    access for women and people of color—a history that others have
                    detailed. Women were accepted as novelists generations before they
                    could speak in public and longer still before they could vote or earn
                    degrees from the preeminent universities. The current feminization of
                    the humanities profession (it has not happened in STEM) came after
                    a period of decline from the 1930s–60s in the number of female academ-
                    ics. A significant cohort of current female leaders in higher education
                    earned tenure in English departments with work in feminist studies.
                    These gains for a few may be precarious. But there are signs in the com-
                    mon parlance of journalists and activists today that feminist research
                    since the 1980s (not just in literature) has rippling if unattributed influ-
                    ence. Before women had a foothold in academia, there were some public
                    orators, reformers, and international authorities who commanded atten-
                    tion in Europe and North America.
                            These predecessors would not have been tenured professors, though
                    some were gaining access to education or careers as librarians, nurses, or
                    social workers, or were on the international scene as philanthropists.
                    Since the 1830s, abolitionist and women’s rights movements spanned
                    the Atlantic in correspondence, print, conventions, and lecture tours.11
                    We can look for grandmothers without revering simplified biographical
                    icons, as the History Months might do. Here, I leaf through well-
                    documented figures (printed short biographies are linked in my data-
                    base, Collective Biographies of Women) who are usually kept apart in
                    Victorian, American, or African American studies.12 Consider Margaret
                    Fuller’s seminars, lectures, and Woman in the Nineteenth Century; Harriet
                    Martineau’s Illustrations of Political Economy and influential assessments of
                    the U. S. and slavery; Anna Jameson’s popularization of Italian art history
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800058X

                                                                                                            FEMINISM                695
              and famous lectures on women’s social mission; and Harriet Beecher
              Stowe’s star turn in Britain after Uncle Tom’s Cabin. “The Battle Hymn of
              the Republic” was only the beginning of Julia Ward Howe’s career as mag-
              azine editor, lecturer, and co-founder of the American Woman Suffrage
              Association and many other clubs. It is impossible to overstate the interna-
              tional reach at the turn of the century of very different celebrities,
              Charlotte Perkins Gilman and Frances Willard, misguided as they were
              in their nationalism, eugenics, and temperance. These white women
              intersected with a remarkable African American roster of eloquent lead-
              ers, with notable friction at the largely white-supremacist World’s
              Columbian Exposition of 1893.13 By 1893, there were three published col-
              lective biographies representing the lives of dozens of “race women,”
              invariably including Phillis Wheatley, Sojourner Truth, Ida B. Wells, and
              the elocutionist Hallie Quinn Brown, and many others who wrote or
              spoke authoritatively, sometimes mirroring separatist racial and gender
              theories. By 1933, Lifting as They Climb compiled short biographies, por-
              traits, and reports from many branches of women’s clubs, featuring eighty
              African American female activists, including the novelist Jessie Fauset and
              the author of the book herself, club founder and historian Elizabeth
              Lindsay Davis (1855–1944).14 Segregation did not entirely limit club
              members to the colored lecture circuit. Such figures as Ida B. Wells
              gave lecture tours abroad, and Mary McLeod Bethune was a member of
              Franklin Roosevelt’s cabinet.
                      Victorian studies of animals, environment, technology and com-
              munication, cognition and affect, and sciences from astronomy to
              geology now join resurgent poetics and poetry studies, stylistics and
              digital textual studies, and book history—the trends are stimulating.
              Digital research has expanded access to the spectrum of women’s
              activism, and it has at the same time obscured materials that are in
              copyright but pre-Internet. Periodization and national boundaries as
              well as the bias toward belles lettres still tend to obscure the public
              humanities before there were tenured feminists. At nearly a half cen-
              tury of feminist Victorian studies, perhaps we can write an intersec-
              tional history beyond institutional ( job list) categories. The déjà-vu
              history of women’s movements need not keep coming as a surprise.
              When the humanities mesh with social justice, they are strengthened
              by a longer and broader memory than the pseudo-scientific racism
              and misogyny of the neo-fascists in Europe and the United States in
              the present day.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800058X

                    696          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. V21 Collective, V21: Victorian Studies for the Twenty-first Century, http://
                            v21collective.org/manifesto-of-the-v21-collective-ten-theses/.
                       2. Talia Schaffer, Romance’s Rival: Familiar Marriage in Victorian Fiction
                            (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016).
                       3. Elizabeth Barrett Browning, “Letter 1809. EBB to Henry Chorley,” The
                            Brownings’ Correspondence: An Online Edition, Wedgestone Press, 2018,
                            http://www.browningscorrespondence.com/correspondence/2048/.
                       4. Tanya Agathocleous, Richard Kaye, Caroline Reitz, and Talia
                            Schaffer, Organizers, The Woman Card: Feminism and Victorian
                            Studies, Past, Present, and Future (New York: A Conference at CUNY
                            Graduate Center, 2017), https://victorian.commons.gc.cuny.edu/
                            2017-the-woman-card-program/.
                       5. Walter Houghton, The Victorian Frame of Mind, 1830–1870 (New
                            Haven: Yale University Press, 1963); Raymond Williams, Culture and
                            Society, 1780–1950 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1958);
                            Richard Altick, The English Common Reader (Chicago: University of
                            Chicago Press, 1957).
                       6. Steven Marcus, The Other Victorians (New York: Basic, 1966).
                       7. Steve Schnur, “Pink and White Tyranny,” Commentary, November 1,
                            1977; review of Ann Douglas, The Feminization of American Culture
                            (New York: Knopf, 1977), https://www.commentarymagazine.com/
                            articles/the-feminization-of-american-culture-by-ann-douglas/.
                       8. Sharon Marcus, Between Women (Princeton: Princeton University
                            Press, 2007).
                       9. Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar, The Madwoman in the Attic (New
                            Haven: Yale University Press, 1979); Harold Bloom, The Anxiety of
                            Influence (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973).
                    10. Ellen Moers, Literary Women: The Great Writers (Oxford: Oxford
                            University Press, 1977); Elaine Showalter, A Literature of Their Own
                            (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977).
                    11. Bonnie S. Anderson, Joyous Greetings (Chicago: University of Chicago
                            Press, 2001).
                    12. Alison Booth, Collective Biographies of Women Database, http://
                            cbw.iath.virginia.edu.
                    13. On the representation of gender and race associated with the
                            Columbian Exhibition, see Alison Booth, How to Make It as a
                            Woman: Collective Biographical History from Victoria to the Present
                            (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004), 214–23.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800058X

                                                                                FEMINISM , FIN DE SIÈCLE                            697
              14. Elizabeth Lindsay Davis, Lifting as They Climb (Washington, DC:
                     National Association of Coloured Women, 1933), http://cbw.iath.vir-
                     ginia.edu/books_display.php?id=1555.
              Fin de Siècle
              MATTHEW POTOLSKY
              F     IN de Siècle is a messy term, applicable to such a wide range of phe-
                    nomena as to be nearly incoherent. And yet, it serves an important if
              underappreciated function in Victorian Studies, disrupting the hermeti-
              cally sealed bell jar that any period identified with the life of a monarch
              can become. Defined by a sense of crisis and opposition, fin de siècle
              names those things that were never quite assimilated into the
              high-Victorian moment; openly cosmopolitan, it places that moment in
              a global context it often resisted.
                      Fin de siècle was first used in Britain in 1890, having been borrowed,
              accent and all, from France, where it had an earlier popular debut as the
              title of an 1888 play. Most obviously, it is a period term, but like so many
              other such terms, it also stands in for a characteristic style, set of affects,
              and dominant literary or artistic forms. A. O. Lovejoy famously argued
              that the word “romanticism” really designates at least three distinct
              “thought-complexes,” each an “exceedingly unstable intellectual com-
              pound.”1 Fin de siècle, I would argue, in Lovejoy’s spirit, designates no
              less than four “compounds”: a program, a mood, and an intellectual
              milieu, as well as a period in cultural history. These compounds are all
              “unstable”: changing the composition of one changes the nature of the
              others.
                      Consider the many different period definitions in fin-de-siècle studies.
              In an influential essay from 1974, “Truth in Labelling: Pre-Raphaelitism,
              Aestheticism, Decadence, Fin de Siècle,” Ruth Z. Temple argues that the
              period designated by fin de siècle should properly be restricted “to the
              last decade of the century.”2 This restriction accords with many early schol-
              arly studies, notably Holbrook Jackson’s The Eighteen Nineties (1919).3 But
              contrary to W. B. Yeats’s sardonic claim that “in 1900 everybody got
              down off his stilts,” the term fin de siècle tends in practice to cover a longer
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800058X

