                    700          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    6. Max Nordau, Degeneration (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,
                          1993), 1.
                    7. Raymond Williams, Culture and Society, 1780–1950 (New York:
                          Columbia University Press, 1983).
                    Form
                    STEPHEN ARATA
                    A        TRUISM: to understand a work of literature you must attend not just
                             to what it says but to how it is made. That is, you must attend to
                    form. A second truism: it can be difficult to persuade students of the
                    truth of that truism. I am not suggesting that students never respond
                    to a work’s formal features, only that such responses tend to be felt in
                    the blood and felt along the heart rather than brought fully into con-
                    sciousness for the purposes of reflection or analysis. And, they sometimes
                    tell me, that’s as it should be. Implicit in their resistance to formal anal-
                    ysis is the suspicion that it is at best tangential to and at worst destructive
                    of what is most valuable in any particular work of literature. This is the
                    case whether the work in question is a lyric poem or a three-decker
                    novel. Why master scansion if the point of reading poetry is to be
                    made to feel physically as if the top of your head were taken off? Why
                    scrutinize modes of narration or map out textual networks when your
                    research interests center on questions of class or gender or empire that
                    are treated thematically, and with great power, in the novels you’re study-
                    ing? Formal analysis can seem pedantic or hermetic (or both), a set of
                    technical exercises designed to numb aesthetic response or else to quar-
                    antine literature from the richness and complexity of lived experience.
                            Outside the classroom, formalist criticism flourishes. A renewed
                    attention to form has led to some extraordinary work over the past two
                    decades. Thanks to this work, the questions we ask about form are richer,
                    more various, and more supple than they once were. Those questions can
                    invigorate not just our scholarship but our pedagogy, not least by making
                    formal analysis seem less pedantic or hermetic (or both). Yet their very
                    richness and variety only deepen the pedagogic challenges. Literary
                    form is a protean concept, and students may now wonder where one
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000608

                                                                                                                     FO R M         701
              finds the fortitude to hold it fast for long enough to compel it to utter
              truth. As a methodology, formalism has always been capacious; at present
              it is even more so. As the range of critical activities brought under its
              heading becomes ever more extensive, we may have difficulty saying
              where formal analysis begins or ends. “By form I mean how a literary
              work is made out of artistic conventions and linguistic materials,” writes
              Paul Armstrong.1 Most critics, including me, would agree in principle
              with this definition, but it doesn’t exactly narrow the field of
              investigation.
                      As many have argued, this lack of definitional clarity is not a flaw in
              formalism but one of its enabling conditions. According to Jonathan
              Kramnick and Anahid Nersessian, critics “need not, indeed cannot pro-
              vide a single definition of form because form is an entity known by occa-
              sion.” That is to say, it is a term that only “become[s] intelligible in
              particular and independently interesting contexts.”2 A corollary is that
              we find form where we seek it. The truths form utters depend on the
              questions we ask of it. That we can find only what we know to look for
              is a basic axiom of all scholarly inquiry, so thoroughly internalized that
              we can easily forget that it is anything but self-evident to the novice
              inquirers in our classrooms. Teaching form in the age of New
              Formalism can have the salutary effect of pushing such methodological
              issues into the foreground.
                      Students often press on the question of what exactly it means to say that
              a text has a form or that it contains several forms. We are accustomed to
              drawing analogies from the material world (trees, buildings, waves, rhi-
              zomes) or from social configurations (hierarchies, networks, genealogies),
              but these are of course just that: analogies. Sandra Macpherson proposes
              thinking of “form as nothing more—and nothing less—than the shape
              matter (whether a poem or a tree) takes.”3 Thinking of form in this way
              allows for sophisticated investigations into the nature of literary form in
              general, as Macpherson’s essay everywhere demonstrates. Yet it seems
              worth saying that while a tree has a shape, a poem has a “shape.” That is,
              its shape is figural, a mental construct we use in order to make evident
              some aspect of the poem in question. This is the case whether we think
              of form in spatial or temporal terms. A printed text is of course a material
              entity made of paper, ink, glue, cloth, thread, and so on, and its literal
              shape can be the object of fruitful analysis, but the great majority of formal-
              ist criticism takes as its object of analysis not the material work but an
              abstraction from it. Indeed, formalists need to abstract from the material
              work before they can do the things they wish to do.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000608

                    702          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                            This is not to quibble or to question the validity of the metaphors we
                    use to conjure up literary form. It is, though, to suggest that the metaphors
                    we use are always motivated, and that it is best to be as aware as we can of those
                    motivations, especially when we seek to connect texts to the social or natural
                    world by way of the formal attributes we ascribe to each. To the extent that
                    literary language—poetic, narrative, or dramatic—is highly organized, it is
                    not at all misleading to say that forms inhere in texts. At the same time,
                    the figures we employ in order to think cogently and creatively about form
                    are heuristic devices that need not be organically related to the texts at all.
                    We make use of some figures rather than others because we seek answers
                    to one set of questions rather than another. Our inquiries are context-
                    specific, as are the vocabularies we use to pursue them. Here again student
                    responses can be clarifying. Is literary form “in” a text, I ventriloquize them
                    asking, or is it something you just make up? Do you find it or invent it? Those
                    are not the only two options, but it is not hard to see why the question is posed
                    that way. Found or invented? The answer is yes. One challenge of teaching
                    formalism is to explain why that is so, and why it matters.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Paul B. Armstrong, “Form and History: Reading as an Aesthetic
                          Experience and Historical Act,” Modern Language Quarterly 69, no. 2
                          (2008): 195–219, 198.
                    2. Jonathan Kramnick and Anahid Nersessian, “Form and Explanation,”
                          Critical Inquiry 43, no. 3 (2017): 650–69, 664, 665.
                    3. Sandra Macpherson, “A Little Formalism,” ELH 82, no. 2 (2015): 385–
                          405, 390.
                    Formalism
                    HERBERT F. TUCKER
                    A        trusted colleague’s having written on form leaves me to tease out its
                              associated –ism, and the contentious family of terms of which that
                    suffix makes it a member. I don’t think my keyword belongs with
                    Methodism, Marxism, and other badges of adherence to a system of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:58, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000608

