                                                                                      G E N E R AT I ON S , G E N R E               715
                     Clarendon, 2000), 578. Needless to say, reliance on the surviving
                     records of elite institutions will necessarily yield generations of elites.
              13. These datasets include obituaries (see Munk’s Roll), collective biog-
                     raphies (DNB and ODNB) and matriculation albums (see A Cambridge
                     Alumni Database, http://venn.lib.cam.ac.uk/Documents/acad/2016/
                     search-2016.html).
              14. See Helen Kingstone, Victorian Narratives of the Recent Past: Memory,
                     History, Fiction (Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017).
              15. This list also includes (among other) writers Charles Kingsley and
                     A. H. Clough, artists William Powell Frith and Lowes Cato
                     Dickinson (both of whom painted portraits of their coevals), the
                     Quaker diarist Caroline Fox and cabinetmaker James Dickinson,
                     who produced a memoir.
              Genre
              MELISSA VALISKA GREGORY
              I   S genre a restrictive or productive mode of interpretation for Victorian
                   literature? While twentieth-century theorists such as Benedetto Croce
              and Jacques Derrida mistrusted genre as a conservative edict that policed
              literature’s borders and denied its dynamism, literary scholars who take
              up genre these days often contend that it is the prime source of a literary
              text’s creative and social energy. Metaphors of activity and fluidity dom-
              inate the current scholarly discourse, framing genre as a live action event,
              a complex of shifting forces rather than an inert shape or static label. No
              longer merely a means of taxonomic stabilization that consigns a text
              once and for all to a proper grouping, genre is now what Carolyn
              Williams calls a process of “dynamic formation” or what John Frow
              describes as a “recurrent” performance.1 Classification remains central
              in that genre still depends on the idea that texts can be meaningfully
              organized and grouped according to their shared attributes, but scholars
              have recast classification as generative and productive, illuminating the
              ways genre allows for richer modes of both literary interpretation and cre-
              ation. Today’s genre studies, in other words, view taxonomic groupings as
              shaping and producing knowledge about literature rather than
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000645

                    716          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    restricting it. This more expansive and subtle approach to genre invites
                    new metaphors. “[T]hink of [genres] as swimming in a pool, a kind of
                    generic wateriness,” suggests Wai Chee Dimock. “This medium not
                    only allows for capillary action of various sorts, it also suggests that the
                    concept of genre has meaning only in the plural, only when that pool
                    is seen as occupied by more than one swimmer. . . . [G]enre is best
                    seen not flatly, as the enactment of one set of legislative norms, but as
                    an alternation between dimensions, mediated by vectors of up and
                    down, front and back, in and out.”2 Dimock’s pool suggests that the con-
                    tainment of the water within an elastic and semipermeable boundary
                    actually creates the conditions for energetic exchanges and multidirec-
                    tional movement. Genre operates here as a stimulating rather than
                    repressive force.
                            Such fluid models of genre, however, have not always captured the
                    imagination of Victorianists, many of whom spent considerable energy
                    toward the end of the twentieth century productively erasing the divisions
                    between texts of all kinds. Already working in a field with a deep relation-
                    ship to history, Victorian literature scholars often led the cultural studies
                    trends of the 1990s, advancing provocative readings that prioritized dis-
                    course across genres rather than examining how genre might create dis-
                    course. Perhaps it’s not surprising, then, that—as Michael Prince
                    observes—many of “the key players” who advanced genre studies over
                    the years have been “scholars of the early modern period . . . deeply
                    immersed in problems of representation in the late Renaissance through
                    Romanticism,” not those of the Victorian.3 Indeed, a lingering skepticism
                    of genre as rigid taxonomy continues to surface in work by Victorianists.
                    Caroline Levine’s Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network, for example, is
                    a neo-formalist study by a scholar grounded in Victorian literature that
                    disavows the study of genre as less interesting than the study of form
                    because “[g]enre involves acts of classifying texts”—a narrow interpreta-
                    tion of genre coming from an award-winning book would seem not to
                    bode well for the concept’s relevance to our field.4 Levine’s claim not-
                    withstanding, the neo-formalist revival of the 2000s inspired many
                    nuanced and intelligent explorations of individual genres from the
                    Victorian period. Recent monographs, conferences, and special journal
                    editions from the mid-2000s to the present day suggest we are now at a
                    moment where genre, never completely eclipsed by other questions or
                    methodologies but for a while on the wane, is waxing once again in
                    the field of Victorian literature. At the same time, some of this more
                    recent scholarship also suggests that it is possible to write about genres
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000645

                                                                                                                   GENRE            717
              effectively and still leave underlying heuristics implicit or unclear. Much
              of the recent scholarship on Victorian genre, for example, lumps genre
              and form together, treating them as interchangeable terms. Although
              the two concepts obviously overlap and inform each other, there may
              be considerable benefit to pulling them apart. Genre includes a histori-
              cal component that form does not, and its capacity for illuminating the
              active relationship between history and literature is potentially one of its
              most valuable contributions to our field.
                      I would argue that genre’s role within history is where Victorianists
              have the greatest opportunity to advance genre studies. Marxist scholar-
              ship, particularly by way of Fredric Jameson and, more recently, Franco
              Moretti, has suggested that theories of historical ideology are incompat-
              ible with traditional, transhistorical definitions of genres: Jameson’s
              astute use of history as the only cultural framework for genre, for exam-
              ple, effectively argues that aesthetic choices should be reconceived of as
              historical practice, while Moretti’s use of software to achieve “distant
              reading” aggregates data to highlight the rise and fall of genres as they
              appear in print, revealing that the traditional critical practice of focusing
              on individual authors may obscure our understanding of how genre func-
              tioned for readers and book-buyers within history.5 But these approaches
              exclude formal considerations from the study of genre altogether.
              Jameson’s famous statement that genre criticism is “thoroughly discred-
              ited by modern literary theory and practice” in many respects lays the
              ground for Moretti’s decision to define genre through the publishing
              industry and the book market (which is not how most genre theorists
              have generally defined it), with both approaches rejecting the role
              literary form may play in producing knowledge.6 Victorianists have an
              opportunity to ensure that the break between historical and formal
              considerations need not be final. Scholars who study Victorian literature
              have already established a long tradition of thinking about the relationship
              between literary texts and their historical context in ways that allow for
              more of a balance between genre, history, and aesthetics than Marxist
              approaches often do. With their deep knowledge of history, Victorianists
              can show how genre alternates, as Dimock suggests, between multiple
              dimensions, producing knowledge about both aesthetics and historical for-
              mations simultaneously. Levine suggests that history stabilizes genre,
              explaining that without historical interpretation, “One might not be able
              to tell the difference between a traditional folktale and a story recently
              composed for children or to recognize a satire from a distant historical
              moment.”7 But genres aren’t historical artifacts to be dusted off and
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000645

                    718          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    exhibited on permanent display, dutifully accompanied by curatorial notes
                    about their original use (“This one is a children’s story”). Rather, as
                    Michael Cohen argues in the recent introduction to the excellent special
                    edition of Nineteenth-Century Literature on the ballad, genres are “historical
                    agents.”8 They move through history as actors and operatives, performing
                    in multiple registers and often pursuing multiple missions.
                            For a brief example of the way a historical understanding of genre
                    complicates our understanding of how a literary text might function,
                    opening new questions rather than shutting down the conversation, con-
                    sider the following untitled text about the loss of an infant:
                             A baby’s cradle with no baby in it,
                             A baby’s grave where autumn leaves drop sere;
                             The sweet soul gathered home to Paradise,
                             The body waiting here.
                     Without knowing that Christina Rossetti wrote the above as a poem for
                    Sing-Song, her 1872 volume of original verse for children, we do not auto-
                    matically know what this text is, what social work it might do, or what aes-
                    thetic effect it might be expected to have. Identifying the category to
                    which it belongs—genre as an act of historical interpretation—gives us
                    a starting point. But the knowledge that Rossetti’s work can be classified
                    as Victorian children’s poetry hardly puts the matter of genre to rest.
                    Rather, the question of genre proliferates in relation to this text, branch-
                    ing off in a number of new directions. Like all children’s literature from
                    this period, particularly that aimed at preliterate readers, Rossetti’s poem
                    would most likely have been read aloud by an adult woman to a child,
                    thus placing it into the category of live performance. Such a category
                    invites a variety of questions about the means of public circulation for wom-
                    en’s poetry, including how Rossetti may have discovered strategies for bypass-
                    ing the all-male reading and reception that inaugurated her most famous
                    earlier poem, “Goblin Market.” Moreover, this poem could just as easily be
                    placed into the category of lament or elegy, but a close study of it in relation
                    to other elegies from this period invites us to question some of our most basic
                    assumptions about how and where the Victorians expressed mourning, par-
                    ticularly for brief lives that have no obvious public value. And, since the vol-
                    ume was released in December 1871, Sing-Song also belongs to the category
                    of the Victorian illustrated Christmas gift book, a material genre with a host
                    of social and economic implications related to gender and social class. The
                    poem within its historical context, then, does not demonstrate or confirm
                    one fixed genre so much as activate a series of overlapping identities,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000645

                                                                       G ENRE, GLOBAL CIRC ULATION                                  719
              performing more than one genre at once and signifying a text’s ability to
              move in multiple directions simultaneously. Attending more closely to any
              one of the above generic categories would surely yield a rich series of claims
              about the poem’s interpretation and use, both for Rossetti’s readers and
              today’s, but my main point is to sketch the ways in which genre becomes
              more dynamic as it functions within history, not less. Developing an increas-
              ingly sophisticated sense of genre, including its relation to form, can allow
              Victorianists to play to one of our chief strengths: our detailed and conscien-
              tious sense of historical context.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Carolyn Williams, “Genre Matters: Response,” Victorian Studies 48, no. 2
                   (2006): 517–20, 295; John Frow, Genre (New York: Routledge, 2015), 15.
              2. Wai Chee Dimock, “Genres as Fields of Knowledge,” PMLA 122, no. 5
                   (2007): 1379–80.
              3. Michael B. Prince, “Mauvais Genres,” New Literary History 34, no. 3
                   (2003): 452–79, 454.
              4. Caroline Levine, Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network (Princeton
                   University Press, 2015), 13.
              5. Fredric Jameson, The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic
                   Act (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981); Franco Moretti, Distant
                   Reading (London: Verso, 2013).
              6. Jameson, The Political Unconscious, 105.
              7. Levine, 13.
              8. Michael Cohen, “Getting Generic,” Nineteenth-Century Literature 71, no.
                   1 (2016): 147–55, 155.
              Global Circulation
              REGENIA GAGNIER
              I   N May 2017, I co-hosted a conference at the India Institute of Advanced
                   Study, Shimla, with a call for papers that read “Scholar-participants are
              expected to address and examine questions that . . . cut across at least two
              linguistic cultures. Papers that are too narrowly monolingual in their
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000645

