                                                                          IMPERIALISM, INFO RMATION                                 739
                                                                       NOTE
              1. Sir John R. Seeley, The Expansion of England, ed. John Gross (Chicago:
                   Chicago University Press, 1971), 12.
              Information
              RICHARD MENKE
              W         HEN Jane Austen’s Emma Woodhouse skeptically asks Harriet
                        Smith whether Robert Martin is “a man of information,” a man
              who reads “beyond the line of his own business,” she isn’t inquiring
              about whether Harriet’s would-be suitor possesses a large set of arbitrary
              data. Rather, Emma is questioning the breadth of his general culture,
              ungenerously applying a vague standard of gentlemanly cultivation to a
              yeoman farmer. Harriet’s flustered answer suggests that she perceives
              the tenor of the question but struggles to frame Robert’s reading habits
              in such terms: “Oh yes!—that is, no—I do not know—but I believe he has
              read a good deal—but not what you would think any thing of. He reads
              the Agricultural Reports, and some other books that lay in one of the win-
              dow seats. . . . But sometimes of an evening, before we went to cards, he
              would read something aloud out of the Elegant Extracts. . . . And I know
              he has read the Vicar of Wakefield.”1 The utilitarian agricultural reports
              would fail Emma’s test, the books on the window seat represent arbitrary
              rather than general reading, and while Vicesimus Knox’s Elegant Extracts
              might bespeak a laudable impulse toward self-improvement, this popular
              anthology suggests not wide-ranging cultivation but efficient edification
              via preselected highlights. (Emma herself turns to the book as a source
              of riddles, and in real life, Austen had given a copy of it to a niece in
              1801.) Perhaps The Vicar of Wakefield might pass muster.
                      Elsewhere, too, Austen associates information with general self-
              cultivation via reading. As a girl, Catherine Morland prefers “baseball . . .
              to books—or at least books of information—for, provided that nothing
              like useful knowledge could be gained from them, provided they were all
              story and no reflection, she had never any objection to books at all.” For
              Austen, information is “useful knowledge” of a particular sort. It resides not
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000700

                    740          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    in the raw facts of agricultural reports but in William Shakespeare (“a great
                    store of information”) and other forms of cultivated reading, a fund of gene-
                    ral truths for reflection.2
                            Shortly after Austen’s time, Geoffrey Nunberg suggests, this idea of
                    information as general culture interacted with the granular sense of
                    information as a particular instance of informing someone, thus by the
                    early Victorian era helping to yield the modern “abstract” meaning of
                    information: information as a kind of corpuscular fact able to circulate
                    as a dematerialized flow.3 In an informatic Aufhebung, Emma’s sense of
                    information as storehouse of insight removed from immediate use
                    now amalgamates with the particularities that even Harriet recognized as
                    non-information—the report’s systematic recording, the haphazard vol-
                    ume’s givenness, the textual excerpt’s removal from its context. Information
                    comes to denote facts or representations that are somehow out there,
                    independent of any specific instantiation, removed from context and
                    materiality. In a further reversal from Austen’s informatics, bloodless,
                    scattered abstract information could therefore appear quite distinct from
                    knowledge, since knowledge seems to presuppose a knower who has inter-
                    nalized it. In 1870, J. A. Froude points to this distinction as he skeptically
                    takes on the Victorian assumption that “larger information generates
                    larger and nobler thoughts.” On the contrary, he argues, a scattered edu-
                    cation in useless generalities will lead young men to become “socialists,”
                    “trades-unionists,” “Fenians,” and readers of “the penny newspaper.”
                    Knowledge is now the antidote for diffuse information: “The evils caused
                    by a smattering of information, sounder knowledge may eventually
                    cure.”4
                            Removed from context, alienated from a knowing subject, informa-
                    tion since the mid-nineteenth century has often seemed a kind of imma-
                    terial substance, ideally suited to pass from one medium to the next in an
                    emerging world of media multiplicity, colonial knowledge, and control at
                    a distance. Yet this protean, general quality has made information
                    strangely apt to adopt the material contours of its own media and for-
                    mats, however stealthily. In Austen, information had lain in books to
                    be unlocked by the correct mode of reading; even Shakespeare is a
                    codex to be read, not a playscript or performance. But for the
                    Victorians, information readily takes on the properties of newly invented
                    technologies that seemed to alienate data from matter and context. Like
                    messages on the electric telegraph, information now circulates instantly
                    and far from its origins, an immaterial fluid that resembles Victorian
                    descriptions of electricity. Or it comes to resemble the ranks of names,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000700

                                                                                                    INFO RMATION                    741
              codes, and numbers with which a Bradshaw’s Guide translates gross move-
              ments of coal, steam, and metal into a grid of fine print, the rhythm of
              railway time into the visual simultaneity of the table, ordered and ready to
              hand yet complex and challenging to decode. In Dracula (1897), infor-
              mation—tracking the Count, the vampire-hunters often seek it by
              name—takes after Mina Harker’s typescript, the novel’s putative origin
              and the destination for its collage of journals, letters, news clippings,
              and phonograph diaries. Indeed, typing comes to represent a kind of
              undeath for documents, sapping the essence from its originals even as
              it allows them to live on indefinitely in a kind of regularized, alienated
              form, as typewritten information.
                      By the end of the nineteenth century, proliferating, disjointed,
              insubstantial information itself could become a model for printed
              texts—a final reversal of Austen’s bookish informatics. In George
              Gissing’s New Grub Street (1891), a character who edits the “general infor-
              mation column” of the mediocre journal Chat (“Would you be so good as
              to inform me . . . what was the exact area devastated by the Great Fire of
              London—that kind of thing”) comes up with a scheme to transform it
              into Chit-Chat, a frothy assemblage of excerpted “information—bits of sto-
              ries, bits of description, bits of scandal, bits of jokes, bits of statistics,” that
              becomes the great hit of the era. The randomness and disjunction of
              information become formal rules: “No article” in Chit-Chat may “measure
              more than two inches in length,” and those inches “must be broken into
              at least two paragraphs.”5 A parody of the real weekly newspaper Tit-Bits,
              Chit-Chat becomes Gissing’s bleak paradigm for print culture in a nascent
              information age.
                      Strategically indeterminate yet covertly medium-specific, the phe-
              nomenon of Victorian information suggests how we might analyze not
              just the ideas in things but the things in ideas. The history of information
              also offers further avenues of research into Victorian culture—for
              instance, into questions about what counts as information, what forms
              it takes, and who owns or controls it. Information’s Victorian histories
              also indicate that the media technologies behind our own contemporary
              scholarship are hardly neutral, that the affordances of the digital archive,
              etext, and searchable database are already materially informing our ideas
              about the past.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000700

                    742          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Jane Austen, Emma, ed. James Kinsley (Oxford: Oxford University
                          Press, 2003), 23 (emphasis mine).
                    2. Jane Austen, Northanger Abbey, in Northanger Abbey, Lady Susan, The
                          Watsons, Sanditon, ed. James Kinsley and John Davie (Oxford:
                          Oxford University Press, 2003), 7.
                    3. Geoffrey Nunberg, “Farewell to the Information Age,” in The Future of
                          the Book (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), 103–38.
                    4. James Anthony Froude, “On Progress,” in Short Studies on Great Subjects,
                          2nd ser. (New York: Scribner, 1872), 262–63.
                    5. George Gissing, New Grub Street, ed. John Goode (Oxford: Oxford
                          University Press, 1998), 459–60.
                    Institutions
                    MAIA MCALEAVEY
                             “To you the British House of Commons is everything.”
                             “Yes;—everything,’ said Mr. Palliser, with unwonted enthusiasm;—
                             everything, everything. That and the Constitution are everything.”
                                                                         — Anthony Trollope, Can You Forgive Her?1
                    I      spent the early months of the Donald Trump administration rereading
                          Anthony Trollope’s Barsetshire and Palliser novels, a self-protective
                    act that at first I understood as a retreat. It was only after former FBI
                    Director James Comey testified before the Senate Intelligence
                    Committee on June 8, 2017 that I realized why Trollope’s signature
                    form—the series of linked novels—felt newly vital: Trollope’s novel
                    sequences tell the story of institutional durability amid cultural upheaval.
                            During the 2016 election, James Comey was responsible both for an
                    investigation into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server and for a
                    subsequent investigation into the Trump campaign’s connection to
                    election-meddling by the Russians. After President Trump abruptly
                    removed Comey from his post at the FBI, Comey was received as a
                    hero on the left, even by those who blamed him for Hillary Clinton’s
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000700

