                                                                                  LITERATURE, LOGISTICS                             749
              10. “literature, n.,” OED Online.
              11. The database is designed to “enable new lines of inquiry into canon
                     formation, the evolution of disciplines, pedagogical change, and
                     institutional history” (“About—The Open Syllabus Project,” http://
                     opensyllabusproject.org/faq).
              12. Thomas H. English, “Contemporary Literature,” South Atlantic
                     Bulletin 5, no. 1 (1939): 1–6; The Norton Anthology of English
                     Literature, 9th ed., ed. M. H. Abrams, Stephen Greenblatt, et al.
                     (New York: Norton, 2012); Chris Hart, Doing a Literature Review:
                     Releasing the Social Science Research Imagination (London: Sage,
                     1998). If one restricts the search to “English,” the third book listed
                     in the results is a reference source: William Harmon’s A Handbook
                     to Literature, 12th ed. (Boston: Pearson, 2011).
              Logistics
              SUSAN ZIEGER
              L      OGISTICS, the art and science of efficiently managing the mobility
                      of things and people, seems a twenty-first century phenomenon,
              associated with global supply chains and their emblem, the shipping con-
              tainer. Logistics manages the flow of production and distribution, reduc-
              ing inventory costs and delivering goods just-in-time; it nimbly adjusts to
              fluctuations and disruptions in the supply chain, whether from under-
              sourced materials, workers’ strikes, or software malfunctions. Though
              the efficient transportation of goods is as old as antiquity, it clearly accel-
              erates after the Industrial Revolution, as part of the famous annihilation
              of space and time at which Victorians marveled. Steamships, steel
              hulls, and refrigerated shipping expanded the volume and variety of
              transportable goods; and modernizing national and international postal,
              telegraph, telephonic, and wireless networks facilitated fast flows of finan-
              cial and commercial information. Moreover, the term logistique was a
              nineteenth-century one; it originally meant the supply of materiel to
              troops in warfare. The Napoleonic Wars made logistics a new area in
              the study of war, on par with strategy and tactics. Military logistics was
              never aloof from the movement of capital in the prehistory of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000736

                    750          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    commercial logistics. In both senses, logistics was a new nineteenth-
                    century phenomenon. What happens if we readjust a traditional
                    Marxist account of industrial modernity, to consider alienated labor
                    and consumer subjectivity anew, as logistical experience?
                            Time. Focusing on logistics repositions the Victorian period at the cen-
                    ter of longue durée history, between the logistical considerations of the
                    early-eighteenth-century slave trade, and the late twentieth-century emer-
                    gence of logistics as a formal management science. The famous diagram
                    of the Brookes Ship, showing slaves packed like cargo, demonstrated that
                    the Middle Passage was a profound exercise in new commercial practices
                    of logistics. Slave ship designers planned for perceived dimensions and imag-
                    ined minimum needs of slaves. Boycotts of sugar and other slave-made com-
                    modities raised consumer knowledge of, and affective engagement with,
                    supply chains. After the slave Henry “Box” Brown mailed himself from slav-
                    ery in Richmond, Virginia, to freedom in Philadelphia in 1849, his narrative
                    became an homage to the possible subversion of logistical regimes. Yet the
                    very next year, the Fugitive Slave Act demonstrated the nimbleness with
                    which logistical systems could correct themselves, to close such loopholes.
                    Building on longue durée histories such as Ian Baucom’s Specters of the
                    Atlantic: Finance Capital, Slavery, and the Philosophy of History (2005), and
                    Stefano Harney and Fred Moten’s The Undercommons: Fugitive Planning and
                    Black Study (2013), we can identify the slave trade as a modern origin of
                    logistics, and reorient the Victorian period toward it.1 Moreover, looking
                    backward from our own moment of global supply chains, container ships,
                    and just-in-time delivery, we can see logistical thinking beginning to
                    govern both industrial manufacturing and global trade in the nineteenth
                    century—a critical narrative often occluded in conventional accounts of
                    industrialization.
                            Space. As the emphasis on the slave trade makes clear, focusing on logis-
                    tics resituates Britain and its empire in the far wider context of transatlantic
                    and other regional and global commercial and military spaces. It creates new
                    geographical configurations, facilitating studies of transcolonial, translocal,
                    and global corporate spaces, networks, and exchanges. Logistics as keyword
                    gives us the opportunity to redraw nineteenth-century maps. These might
                    follow maritime history, linking it to finance, insurance, and the opening
                    of new markets; they might trace the global impacts of national efficiency
                    movements in Britain, the U. S. and Germany at the century’s end; and
                    they might chart new pathways of migration and immigration, as people
                    uprooted and resettled spaces across the world. In the military sphere, recast-
                    ing the Crimean War not as a military disaster but as a logistical one or
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000736

                                                                                                           LO GISTICS               751
              rethinking the Boer Wars—the origins of modern concentration camps—as
              logistical successes, integrates military history into wider and broader cul-
              tural history. Opening new archives, logistics regenerates the expected criti-
              cal topics in Victorian studies.
                      Method. Logistics as a keyword also adjusts the familiar account of the
              nineteenth century given by Marshall Berman by way of Walter Benjamin
              and Karl Marx, in which “all that is solid melts into air.”2 This phrase con-
              jures nineteenth-century modernity as promise and threat, adventure and
              destruction, a disorienting intoxication in which Victorians can still
              remember what it was like not to be modern. Literary scholars favored
              the melting metaphor because it licensed postmodern textual play and
              interpretation over the putative solidity or seeming factual results of quan-
              titative methods. Logistics prompts us to confront material anew: to think
              about the movement of goods, people, and information across space; to
              consider the assembly of goods through supply chains; to acknowledge
              that distribution is continuous with production and consumption. As a key-
              word, logistics engages the wider material turn, toward new materialisms,
              distributed agency, ecocriticism, and infrastructure studies. If, at the
              same time, we interpret the way language, literature, and aesthetics con-
              struct logistics’ cultural meanings—for example, through metaphors of
              resilience and forms such as chains—then we can give a fresher and fuller
              account of the experiences and meanings of modernity.
                      What does the study of logistics look like for literary scholars?
              Exciting work is already brewing, for example Jonathan Grossman’s anal-
              ysis of global transport networks and infrastructures in Charles Dickens’
              Great Expectations and Jules Verne’s Around the World in 80 Days, Richard
              Menke’s discussion of the telegraph’s relation to realism, and Laura
              Rotunno’s study of literature and the postal system—in particular, the
              effect of Anthony Trollope’s work for the post office on his novels.3
              For the canon-breakers, the possibilities are even more extensive. The
              Victorians clearly prized efficiency, and laid the foundations for global
              commerce and militarism; these two facts are linked in ways that will
              re-illuminate modern experience as modes of logistical life. New atten-
              tion to logistics will make the nineteenth century crucial to understand-
              ing the twenty-first.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Ian Baucom, Specters of the Atlantic: Finance Capital, Slavery, and the
                   Philosophy of History (Durham: Duke University Press, 2005); Stefano
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000736

                    752          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                          Harney and Fred Moten, The Undercommons: Fugitive Planning and Black
                          Study (Brooklyn: Autonomedia, 2013).
                    2. Marshall Berman, All That is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of
                          Modernity (New York: Penguin, 1982).
                    3. Jonathan Grossman, “Living the Global Transport Network in Great
                          Expectations,” Victorian Studies 57, no. 2 (2015): 225–50; “The
                          Character of a Global Transport Infrastructure: Jules Verne’s Around
                          the World in Eighty Days,” History and Technology 29, no. 3 (2013):
                          247–61; see also his “Standardization (standardisation),” Critical
                          Inquiry 44, no. 3 (Spring 2018): 447–78. See also Richard Menke,
                          Telegraphic Realism: Victorian Fiction and Other Information Systems
                          (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2008); and Laura Rotunno,
                          Postal Plots in British Fiction, 1840–1898: Readdressing Correspondence in
                          Victorian Literature (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013).
                    Love
                    HILARY M. SCHOR
                    W          HAT did they talk about, those eminent Victorians, when they
                               talked about love? For people whose stiff collars, corsets, and cus-
                    toms seemed designed to evade intimacy, they nevertheless bumped
                    into love in every form: romantic love; erotic fixation; affection (some-
                    times chilling) to children and devotion to husbands and wives; and
                    not the least, love of dogs. God was love; the love of nature led to love
                    of mankind; In Memoriam ends with a wedding; and even passionless
                    John Stuart Mill, the thinking machine, wrote a dedication of
                    such intense feeling that it embarrassed his friends. It was love that was
                    real; love that was earnest; and the grave was not its end—for, “if God
                    choose, / I shall but love thee better after death.”1
                            At our current moment, we, too, seem a little embarrassed by
                    Victorian love. A strangely Utilitarian account of love is resurgent in
                    our literary criticism, offering an unexpected echo of an earlier era.
                    Our view of the Victorians was once that of Walter Houghton’s
                    Victorian Frame of Mind: married love was a sacrament; lust something
                    that existed outside of marriage, in both senses—there might be fierce
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000736

