                                                                                                      MATERIALITY                   757
              Materiality
              AVIVA BRIEFEL
                      ANIEL Hack writes that “materiality and its cognates are often used
              D       with a vagueness that blurs distinctions.”1 Perhaps, then, we should
              examine this hazy term through the blurriest of beings, the ghost.
              Victorian spiritualists repeatedly ran against what Jacques Derrida
              terms the “paradox of incorporation”2 as they had to explain the materi-
              alization of spirit forms in a domain in which materiality was a tricky con-
              cept. It was one thing to claim that spirits could inhabit and animate a
              solid object like a table, or appear in transparent form on a photographic
              plate, and quite another to argue that spirits were capable of manifesting
              themselves in palpable bodies. These apparitions ranged from detached
              spirit hands to, beginning in the early 1870s, full spirit bodies, all of
              which looked and felt like the real thing. One sitter who attended a
              séance with the medium Douglas Home, for instance, claims to have
              felt a spirit hand that “was a soft, warm, fleshy, radiant, substantial
              hand, such as I should be glad to feel at the extremity of the friendship
              of my best friends.”3
                      From one perspective, spectral bodies afforded the (more or less)
              concrete evidence that spiritualists needed to prove their claims of an
              afterlife. According to James Burns, a devoted follower of the movement,
              “Take away from Spiritualism the physical manifestations and we would
              soon be in that cloudland of vague doctrine which prevailed before
              the advent of these manifestations.”4 From another perspective, however,
              these apparitions threatened to challenge spiritualists’ dismissal of the
              idea of resurrection, which entailed a revivification of the material
              body. Instead, they believed that the soul would continue to exist apart
              from the body, but would find alternate ways of becoming embodied dur-
              ing a séance. In an 1869 article for the Spiritual Magazine, Rev. William
              Mountford writes that although “Spiritualism is properly the antithesis
              of materialism,” the soul can find ways of manifesting after death, as
              seen in the “hands of spirit, which had been materialized as to surface
              at least, and which had thereby been made capable of looking and
              doing, for a little while and for some little purposes, like hands of flesh
              and blood.”5
                      Mountford’s account implies that spirit hands and bodies resembled—
              but could not actually be—flesh and blood. Victorian spiritualists thus found
              themselves tasked with redefining materiality as something that hovered
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800075X

                    758          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    between the tangible and the intangible. In a piece for Human Nature titled,
                    “After All, Is There Any Such Thing as Matter?” the medium William
                    Stainton Moses experiments with a new way of thinking about materiality.
                    Describing how he had been grabbed by a “substantial hand of flesh and
                    blood” during a séance, he continues, “Whence came that hand? It was
                    solid, as I understand solidity; warm, according to my ideas of temperature.
                    It was, in all respects, a human hand, save in one material point—It could not
                    possibly have been attached to a human body.”6 Moses tries to resolve this problem
                    by proposing that matter might be different than what it is generally held to
                    be: “A long course of pondering on such as these have led me to entertain
                    disrespectful ideas of Matter, as a vague, shifty, illusory sort of thing which
                    I could not get hold of in any way, though it is generally supposed to be
                    the only thing which one can get hold of at all. I have even begun to question
                    whether we are not all wrong about it, and whether, in effect, there is any
                    such thing at all.”7 His deliberations escalate into a radical redefinition of
                    materiality, adeptly shifting it into a lesser category of believability than the
                    ghost. While it is conceivable to grasp a spirit’s hand, it may no longer be pos-
                    sible to get a hold of what matter is.
                            Victorian spiritualists provided a model for such negotiations of
                    materiality in their accounts of how spirits labored to manufacture
                    forms through which they could appear to sitters. As Epes Sargent
                    explains, spirits must “reproduce certain fac-similes of [their] appearance
                    while in the earth-life.”8 There were several theories about how such
                    modes of self-representation could be carried out, one of the most popular
                    being that spirits would collect particles of matter from séance sitters and
                    refashion them into temporary bodies. According to one account, “The
                    refined matter out of which these apparitions were formed . . . was gath-
                    ered from the individuals composing the circle, each contributing to the
                    supply. The raw material was then collected together in a mass—as the
                    housewife, having kneaded the dough for bread, prepares it to be rolled
                    out into any form desired—and a certain portion (sufficient for the man-
                    ifestations about to be made) divided from it.”9 Unlike raw materials used
                    in manufacture, which Marx argues, “lose the independent form with
                    which they entered into the labour process,”10 material atoms are ulti-
                    mately returned to their living owners once spirits have completed their
                    manifestations. The matter’s journey from real human bodies, to the
                    abstract realm of spirit bodies, and back to the human captures the insta-
                    bility of materiality in a spiritualist context. More broadly, the process pro-
                    vides a model in miniature, enabled by the supernatural, of the intellectual
                    and social labor expended in efforts to “grasp” the concept of materiality
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800075X

                                                                                        MATERIALITY, MEDIA                          759
              during the Victorian period. Based on our current preoccupation with
              defining what we mean when we talk about Victorian materiality through
              “thing theory” and other object-based methodologies, this labor continues
              to haunt us today.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. Daniel Hack, The Material Interests of the Victorian Novel
                     (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2005), 1.
                2. Jacques Derrida, Specters of Marx: The State of Debt, the Work of Mourning
                     and the New International, trans. Peggy Kamuf (New York: Routledge,
                     1994), 5.
                3. Verax [J. J. G. Wilkinson], “Evenings with Mr. Home and the Spirits,”
                     Spiritual Herald (February 1856): 5.
                4. J[ames]Burns, “The Work of the Spiritualist, and How to Do It?”
                     Medium and Daybreak, November 17, 1876, 722–23.
                5. Rev. W. Mountford, “Thoughts on Spiritualism,” Spiritual Magazine
                     (November 1869): 481–82.
                6. M. A. Oxon [William Stainton Moses], “After All, Is There Any Such
                     Thing as Matter?” Human Nature (May 1877): 194.
                7. Oxon, “After All,” 194.
                8. Epes Sargent, The Proof Palpable of Immortality, 2nd ed. (Boston: Colby
                     and Rich, 1881), 21.
                9. “How Do Spirits Make Themselves Visible?” Spiritual Magazine (June
                     1872): 256.
              10. Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. 1, trans. Ben Fowkes (New York: Penguin,
                     1976), 311.
              Media
              ALISON BYERLY
                     LTHOUGH the term “media” postdates the Victorian period,
              A       Victorian culture was suffused with media. In fact, mediation, broadly
              defined, was a defining aesthetic of the period, and one could argue that
              the field of media studies properly begins with the nineteenth century.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:45, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800075X

