                                                                                             ME D I A , M E D I C I N E             763
              7. Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin, Remediation: Understanding New
                   Media (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2009).
              8. Henry Jenkins and David Thorburn, Rethinking Media Change: The
                   Aesthetics of Transition (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003), x.
              Medicine
              MARY WILSON CARPENTER
              S     TEVEN Shapin has observed that although we live in a scientific cul-
                    ture, most of this culture’s inhabitants have little idea of what scien-
              tists do and know.1 By contrast, not only do we live in a medicalized
              culture, but as Charles E. Rosenberg comments, “for most of us today,
              physicians and lay persons alike, medicine is what doctors do and what
              doctors believe (and what they prescribe for the rest of us).”2 Most of
              us today have direct, personal knowledge of what doctors do and know.
              This major cultural difference between “science” and “medicine”
              emerged in the nineteenth century when medical practice became
              part of everyday life. Science inhabited a much more elite sphere.
              Victorians read about science and scientists, but they did not have a fam-
              ily scientist who practiced science on them. They did have family doctors
              or, if they were poor, Poor Law doctors. The Victorian poor were also
              likely to experience hospital medicine, as more and more voluntary hos-
              pitals, supported by donations and open to the poor, were founded. By
              the last quarter of the century, more and more middle- and upper-class
              patients were also entering hospitals as private patients.
                      It was in the nineteenth century that a medical profession first
              emerged as such. In the early part of the century, medicine and surgery
              were practiced by a conglomerate bunch of apothecaries, apprentice-
              trained surgeons who might or might not have had any formal instruc-
              tion in surgery or experience in hospitals, and Oxbridge physicians
              who were erudite in Greek and Latin medicine but might never have
              treated a live patient until they went into practice. By the end of the
              nineteenth century, legislation had imposed standards requiring univer-
              sity medical education and hospital training, and efforts—largely unsuc-
              cessful—were made to define and exclude “quacks.”
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000773

                    764          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                            Historians agree that a medical culture specific to the nineteenth
                    century emerged in that time, one that had never existed before, and
                    that that emergence of a new medical culture changed the entire social
                    culture of the Victorian era. In 1976, Charles Webster proposed that
                    medicine should be examined from the “‘perspective of the beliefs, val-
                    ues, social organization, and professional activities of every stratum within
                    the ranks of medical practitioners; and by regarding patients as more
                    than passive objects of disease. It should be an essential part of our
                    brief [for the newly formed British Society for the History of
                    Medicine] to resurrect the patient.’” Webster concluded that “‘English
                    historians, following in the wake of their French counterparts, have
                    become aware of the full relevance of medicine to the understanding
                    of social structure, social transformation, and collective mentality.’”3
                    Doubtless the best-known of those French counterparts is Michel
                    Foucault, who formulated the change in power relations between doctor
                    and patient from the largely “bedside” medicine practiced before the
                    nineteenth century, in which the patient was the doctor’s patron and
                    therefore largely in control of her treatment, to the “clinic” or hospital
                    medicine of the nineteenth century, in which the poor were treated
                    for free but became the passive objects of the “clinical gaze.”4
                            The emergence of the Victorian profession of medicine affected both
                    men and women profoundly, but in very different ways. For lower-middle
                    and even working-class men, the newly respectable profession of medicine
                    offered a path to upward social mobility and financial security. John Snow
                    is an example of such a working-class man—his father had started out as a
                    common laborer—who became a highly respected physician-scientist (he
                    investigated and proved the transmission of cholera in polluted water) and
                    later specialist in the new practice of anesthesiology, assisting in Queen
                    Victoria’s deliveries of royal offspring.5
                            This opportunity for upward class mobility was not open to women, who
                    were excluded by the legislation that standardized the profession and
                    required university education, from which women were also largely excluded
                    until late in the century. Even then their entry into medicine was vigorously
                    opposed by the medical profession, including such prominent members as
                    Joseph Lister, famed for his innovative theory and practice of antisepsis, who
                    declared that he “could not bear the indecency of discussing with women the
                    secrets of the ‘fleshly tabernacle.’”6 Though not welcomed into the medical
                    profession as physicians in the nineteenth century, they were over eagerly
                    accepted as patients, constructed as a separate “race” from Man, specialized
                    for reproduction. The female body was medicalized. A new specialization,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000773

                                                                                                            MEDICINE                765
              gynecology, emerged based on the “science of woman.” No correlative med-
              ical specialization, andrology, emerged based on a pathologization of the
              male body. Much wholly unnecessary surgery, such as ovariotomies, hysterec-
              tomies, and even clitoridectomies, was based on the medical myth that mal-
              functioning female reproductive organs could produce mental instability,
              such as “menstrual epilepsy,” hysteria, and “female fits.” As Ornella
              Moscucci comments, “For the scientist, the march of progress had pushed
              the boundaries of gynecology forward. The historian will be more inclined
              to view this development as the expression of an enduring ideology.”7
                      Distinct medical cultures also emerged in the Victorian era, composed
              of “groups whose social relations and individual identities are formed by
              their common interest in and interaction with a particular issue, though dif-
              fering in professional or nonprofessional status, political position, health, or
              illness.”8 Examples include the culture of Victorian invalidism, the “fallen
              woman” and those who took up the mission of rescuing her, antivaccination-
              ists, and those who passionately advocated the “pure oral method” of teach-
              ing the deaf and dumb, prohibiting the use of sign language.9
                      The emergence of the new medical profession and such transformative
              discoveries as anesthesia and the stethoscope were of such interest to
              the Victorian public as to provide material for countless novels, leading to
              the publication of what is still regarded by many as the greatest medical
              novel ever written, George Eliot’s Middlemarch (1871–72). Charles
              Dickens’s interest in medicine was so great that it features in nearly everything
              he wrote, such that a “medical companion” to his fiction has been pub-
              lished.10 Like religion, medicine was integral to Victorian literary culture.
                      Finally, the new social and cultural histories of medicine that emerged
              in the late twentieth century have produced such interdisciplinary fields as
              medical humanities, narrative medicine, and literature and medicine, all
              of which find ample teaching material in Victorian culture. Unless “med-
              icine” is recognized as an essential keyword in Victorian culture, many
              opportunities for creating new courses and attracting students will be
              missed. “Medicine” as keyword is therefore vital to the sustainability of
              Victorian studies as a field and to the teaching of humanities in general.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. Steven Shapin, “Science,” in New Keywords: A Revised Vocabulary
                     of Culture and Society, ed. Tony Bennett, Lawrence Grossberg,
                     and Meaghan Morris (Malden: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.,
                     2005), 316.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000773

                    766          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       2. Charles E. Rosenberg, “Foreword,” in Erwin H. Ackerknecht, A Short
                            History of Medicine, Revised and Expanded Edition (Baltimore: Johns
                            Hopkins University Press, 2016), xii.
                       3. Charles Webster as quoted in Dorothy Porter, “The Mission of Social
                            History of Medicine: An Historical View,” Social History of Medicine 7,
                            no. 3 (1995): 351–52 (emphasis original).
                       4. Michel Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical
                            Perception, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (London: Tavistock, 1973).
                            First published 1963.
                       5. Mary Wilson Carpenter, Health, Medicine, and Society in Victorian
                            England (Santa Barbara: Praeger, ABC-CLIO, 2010), 6–7, 13–22,
                            45–51, 151, 157–59.
                       6. Joseph Lister as quoted in M. Anne Crowther and Marguerite
                            W. Dupree, Medical Lives in the Age of Surgical Revolution
                            (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 152.
                       7. Ornella Moscucci, The Science of Woman: Gynaecology and Gender in England
                            1800–1929 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 206.
                       8. Carpenter, Health, 3–4.
                       9. Maria H. Frawley, Invalidism and Identity in Nineteenth-Century Britain
                            (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2004); Carpenter, Health, see espe-
                            cially chap. 4, 5, and 6.
                    10. Joanne Eysell, A Medical Companion to Dickens’s Fiction (Frankfort am
                            Main: Peter Lang, 2005).
                    Melodrama
                    NICHOLAS DALY
                              ELODRAMA ’s critical fortunes took a turn for the better in the
                    M          second half of the twentieth century. Disdained by Victorian crit-
                    ics, and regarded in the early twentieth century as a colorful but crude
                    sideshow to the more significant products of Victorian culture, it was
                    rehabilitated by theatre historians and by literary critics who realized pop-
                    ular theatre’s centrality to nineteenth-century culture more generally.
                    Among the first group were Michael R. Booth and Frank Rahill, who,
                    building on the earlier work of Allardyce Nicoll, created a fuller picture
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000773

