                                                                                                       MELOD RAMA                   769
              popular culture, our students might like to learn a little more about it,
              and I suspect that there is still plenty for us to learn too.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Matthew S. Buckley, “Refugee Theatre: Melodrama and Modernity’s
                   Loss,” Theatre Journal 61, no. 2 (2009): 175–90.
              2. David Mayer, “Encountering Melodrama,” in Victorian and Edwardian
                   Theatre, ed. Kerry Powell (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
                   2004), 145–63, 146.
              Melodrama
              CAROLYN WILLIAMS
              I     have been arguing recently that we need to pay more attention to
                   melodramatic form. Currently no comprehensive account of it exists.
              I have suggested that we should focus on the way the dramatic action is
              interrupted by still pictures, the tableaux, and, correlatively, on the way
              the music starts and stops, segmenting the dramatic action into “pas-
              sages.” (Even when the music is nearly continuous, it swells and recedes
              in volume, calibrated so that the actors’ declamations can be heard; and
              thus, even when fairly continuous, the music participates in the formal
              segmentation of the action.) This way of thinking hypothesizes an audio-
              visual field for analysis, constituted by dialectical relations between dra-
              matic action and pictorial representation; movement and stillness;
              speech and music; sound and silence. The relative strength of this
              method will be tested through the readings it can generate and support.
                      I’m not the first to concentrate on the interruptive nature of melodra-
              ma’s genre form. Juliet John has stipulated: “the emotional economy of
              melodrama is best figured as a series of waves.”1 Martin Meisel drew a formal
              analogy between melodrama, painting, and novels of the nineteenth cen-
              tury; he called their shared narrative form “serial discontinuity” and empha-
              sized the pictorial dramaturgy of the nineteenth-century stage overall.2
              Recently, Ellen Lockhart has attended to melodrama’s “stuttering” form,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:45:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000797

                    770          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    its “stop and go meta-meter.”3 I’ve claimed that in response to the form the
                    spectator feels a rhythmic oscillation between absorption and shock.4
                            Further, I’ve asked: how might the spectator experience those
                    moments when the dramatic action is interrupted by a still picture?
                    Here, I engage in an argument with Michael Fried’s work on the tableau
                    and its beholder. Following Diderot, he has explained that the still pic-
                    ture “calls” to its beholder, then holds that beholder fixated or enthralled
                    before it. Though Fried does note that Diderot also commented on the
                    tableau’s function within the drama, he focuses chiefly on the beholder’s
                    responses to painting (the original meaning of ‘tableau’).5 Within the
                    temporal unfolding of melodrama, however, the sudden appearance of
                    the tableau has a different effect. Absorbed during the dramatic action,
                    the spectator experiences a shock when the action suddenly stops in a
                    picture. No longer absorbed, the spectator is suddenly catapulted,
                    through shock, into a state of aesthetically distanced contemplation,
                    when astonishment and fixation are accompanied by reflection and
                    interpretation. This way of understanding imagines the spectator of
                    melodrama as curious, intelligent, and able to “read” the pictures.
                            Concentrating on the form of melodrama in no way excludes or fails to
                    emphasize its sociopolitical significances. On the contrary. Focusing on the
                    form allows us to see how melodrama makes its sociopolitical points—polem-
                    ically, aesthetically, and above all affectively—at the moment of tableau. The
                    “pointed style” of melodrama—gestures coming to their points in the “atti-
                    tudes,” plot coming to its points in the charged “situations”—culminates
                    with the dramatic action coming to its points in the tableaux. These pictorial
                    moments are indeed “pointed” in two senses, for they pierce their spectators
                    with feeling, but they also suggest—and make the time to concentrate—their
                    intellectual points. In this dynamic, affect, aesthetics, and sociopolitical
                    awareness are intimately conjoined. In other words, I’m not recommending
                    a “mere” formalism. It is through form that we can see and feel the sociopo-
                    litical points. That is what the form is for.
                            Melodramatic form sums up the historical trajectory of late
                    eighteenth- and nineteenth-century aesthetics, as it moves from a focus
                    on epistemological procedure based on sensory perception and toward
                    the prestige of fine art (especially painting) and the nascent discipline
                    of art history. Melodrama spans these two poles of English aesthetic
                    thought with an affective form based on bodily feeling roused and
                    orchestrated by dramatic action and speech, music and tableaux. This
                    is one way to historicize the genre of stage melodrama to the
                    late-eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Of course, we already know
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:45:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000797

                                                                                                       MELOD RAMA                   771
              that this is the period of English stage melodrama; but, placing the genre
              against the history of aesthetics might help to explain the significance of
              this periodization.
                      Thus, the pun on “moving pictures”—often invoked in studies of
              melodrama as well as in film studies—brings into focus the way the pictures
              are moving because they are so very still; their sudden stillness moves their
              spectators into affective states of sentimental or violent feeling accompa-
              nied by aesthetic detachment. For me, this pun on “moving pictures”
              also offers another way to state the historical argument about periodiza-
              tion, seeing that melodrama reaches—as a historical continuum—from
              forms of sentiment and bodily sensation toward film.
                      Melodrama as a genre form can be historicized in another way, if we
              see its historical period as a segment within a longer continuum. This
              takes us to genre theory—and can help us clarify the issue of the relation
              between the historical genre and the transhistorical mode. If we see
              melodrama as a theatrical genre, again we can specify it historically to
              the late-eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Within this framework,
              its history is usually described as a sequence of subgenres (not as a
              sequential march of one subgenre after another, but as a layered unfold-
              ing with survivals and overlaps along the way6). On the other hand, if we
              see melodrama as one form of “music drama,” then we can see how it
              distinguishes itself from opera in the late-eighteenth century (a distinc-
              tion formulated by Rousseau at about the same time that Diderot
              theorized the tableau) and how it eventually becomes film in the late-
              nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. This modal view (obviously)
              posits a long continuity, but it can nevertheless also highlight breaks,
              shifts, and changes within the overarching continuum. Then, through
              this modal lens, we can also see melodrama’s expansion outward into
              other modes and genres, discourses, media, artforms, and other national
              and international cultures of circulation.7
                      The process of melodrama “becoming” film is well documented.8
              (From the modal point of view on genre, the process of media shift
              can be seen as a shift from one phase to another of the “same” thing.)
              Early film often dramatizes the plots of stage melodramas; it uses the act-
              ing style and gestural language of melodrama; and it is accompanied by
              live music, whether by one musical instrument or many. (Even before
              film has a sound track, in other words, the performance is not silent.)
              What I want most to emphasize, however, is that, like melodrama, the
              film strip is a form of serial pictorialization.9
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:45:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000797

                    772          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                             So, whenever you are watching a film—or a digital moving picture—and
                    you are met with a suddenly still picture, you should think of the sedimented
                    presence of melodrama in the later form. The flickering of early film empha-
                    sizes the discontinuity in “serial discontinuity,” the space between the still
                    shots, rather than the illusion of continuity we see in later moving pictures.
                    More precise technology as well as later styles of editing create a more
                    smoothly moving picture that covers the residual melodramatic discontinu-
                    ity; yet, the gesture of stopping time in a still picture—a camera shot within
                    the diegesis, say, or a freeze frame imposed extra-diegetically—lives on to
                    remind us of the history of melodramatic form.
                             This aspect of melodramatic film form has usually been treated
                    predominantly as a function of the technology. And, of course, I don’t
                    want to minimize the history of photography, optical toys, and the magic
                    lantern—among the many other histories important to the development
                    of film. But my point is instead like Geoffrey Batchen’s in Burning With
                    Desire, where he argues that the world was “burning with desire” for the pho-
                    tograph (and its “burning” of the image onto a prepared surface).10 In this
                    view, the technology follows from the desire. My point about melodrama is
                    analogous: the melodramatic tableau prefigures the development of pho-
                    tography and is a marker of the “desire” for fixing time in the still picture.
                    And it was the work of the nineteenth century first to develop the still pic-
                    ture, and then to get the picture moving. In this view, aesthetic determina-
                    tion wins out over technological determinism. Thus, though the still picture
                    is the dialectical opposite of the moving picture, it is also a fundamental con-
                    stituent of the picture’s movement.
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. Juliet John, Dickens’s Villains: Melodrama, Character, Popular Culture
                            (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), 31.
                       2. Martin Meisel, Realizations: Narrative, Pictorial and Theatrical Arts in
                            Nineteenth Century England (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
                            1983), 38.
                       3. Ellen Lockhart, “Forms and Themes of Early Melodrama,” in The
                            Melodramatic Moment, 1780–1820, ed. Katherine Hambridge and
                            Jonathan Hicks (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018).
                       4. Carolyn Williams, “Melodrama,” in The New Cambridge History of
                            Victorian Literature, ed. Kate Flint (Cambridge: Cambridge
                            University Press, 2012), 193–219.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:45:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000797

                                                                                     M E LO D R A M A , M E M O RY                  773
                5. Michael Fried, Absorption and Theatricality: Painting and the Beholder in
                     the Age of Diderot (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), 92–94.
                     Peter Brooks also takes up the analysis of spectatorial enthrallment as
                     “The Aesthetics of Astonishment,” in The Melodramatic Imagination:
                     Balzac, Henry James, Melodrama, and the Mode of Excess (1976; New
                     Haven: Yale University Press, 1995), 24–55.
                6. The best account of the subgenres may be found in Matthew Buckley,
                     “Early English Melodrama,” in The Cambridge Companion to English
                     Melodrama, ed. Carolyn Williams (Cambridge: Cambridge
                     University Press, 2018).
                7. This is the argument of Melodrama Unbound: Across History, Media, and
                     National Cultures, ed. Christine Gledhill and Linda Williams
                     (New York: Columbia University Press, 2018).
                8. See for example Nicholas Vardac, Stage to Screen: Theatrical Method from
                     Garrick to Griffith (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1949) and Ben
                     Brewster and Lea Jacobs, Theater to Cinema: Stage Pictorialism and the
                     Early Feature Film (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998).
                9. Other forms of the strip include William Hogarth’s serial paintings
                     and comic strips—at the earlier and later historical moments of
                     stage melodrama. Erving Goffman’s frame analysis offers a later,
                     sociological version of strip-thinking.
              10. Geoffrey Batchen, Burning with Desire: The Conception of Photography
                     (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997). But see also Garrett Stewart,
                     Between Film and Screen: Modernism’s Photo Synthesis (Chicago:
                     University of Chicago Press, 2000).
              Memory
              JUDITH STODDART
              I   N 1869 John Stuart Mill published a new edition of his father’s Analysis
                   of the Phenomena of the Human Mind (1829), with a critical apparatus
              intended to update this foundational associationist psychology by refer-
              ence to more recent discoveries in mental science. But the apparatus’s
              explanatory power breaks down in the chapter on memory. As the elder
              Mill wraps up his demonstration that memory is a form of association,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:45:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000797

