                                                                                      O C E A NS , OR G AN I C I S M                791
                9. Amy M. King, “Reorienting the Scientific Frontier: Victorian Tide
                     Pools and Literary Realism,” Victorian Studies 47, no. 2 (2005): 153–
                     63.
              10. Jonathan Smith. Charles Darwin and Victorian Visual Culture
                     (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009).
              11. Ursula Kluwick and Virginia Richter, The Beach in Anglophone
                     Literatures and Cultures (Burlington: Ashgate, 2015); Brad Beavan,
                     Karl Bell, and Robert James, Port Towns and Urban Cultures:
                     International Histories of the Waterfront (London: Palgrave Macmillan,
                     2016).
              12. Deborah Denenholz Morse and Martin Danahay, Victorian Animal
                     Dreams: Representations of Animals in Victorian Literature and Culture
                     (Burlington: Ashgate, 2007).
              13. Richard Maxwell, “Unnumbered Polypi,” Victorian Poetry 47, no. 1
                     (2009): 7–23. I cite Maxwell in my forthcoming essay “Tennyson’s
                     ‘Kraken’ Under the Microscope and in the Aquarium,” in Will
                     Abberley’s Underwater Worlds: Aquatic Visions in Art and Literature;
                     Genie Babb, “Inventing the Bug-Eyed Monster: Devil-Fish and
                     Giant Squid in H. G. Wells’s Early Fiction,” Wellsian: The Journal of
                     the H. G. Wells Society 32 (2009): 17–35.
              14. Kelly P. Bushnell, “Maritime Literature,” Oxford Bibliography of
                     Victorian Literature (2016), doi:10.1093/OBO/9780199799558–0143.
              15. I am especially grateful to Editor-in-Chief Juliet John, who invited me
                     to write the entry and provided such constructive feedback.
              16. Times, no. 29278, June 11, 1878, 8.
              Organicism
              JOHN KUCICH
              O        RGANICISM pervades nearly every sphere of nineteenth-century lit-
                       erature and culture. Most obviously, it infuses representations of
              economic and social interdependence in Victorian novels—at local
              and national levels, and also globally, as when Thomas Hardy invokes
              “the great web of human doings . . . weaving in both hemispheres
              from the White Sea to Cape Horn.”1 But Herbert Spencer also makes
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000852

                    792          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    it the cornerstone of sociological theory in “The Social Organism”
                    (1860). Like many social theorists, Spencer roots organicism in the “vital-
                    ism” of early nineteenth-century biology, although its socio-biological
                    ramifications later became a bone of contention in many disciplines,
                    including in debates about liberal political theory between Spencer
                    and Thomas Huxley.2 Organicism also animates John Ruskin’s naturalis-
                    tic conception of Gothic architecture in the second volume of The Stones
                    of Venice (1853), an inspiration to nineteenth-century writers and artists
                    alike. It underpins political projects of vastly different kinds, from what
                    E. P. Thompson calls the “feudal socialism” of Thomas Carlyle’s Past
                    and Present (1843), to William Morris’s green utopia in News from
                    Nowhere (1890), to imperial mythologies of colonial holism in the work
                    of Joseph Conrad, Rudyard Kipling, and others.3 It underlies Victorian
                    medievalism, in all its guises. Its centrality to romantic conceptions of lit-
                    erary form carried over to later nineteenth-century debates about both
                    poetry and fiction, with Henry James notably claiming that “a novel is
                    a living thing, all one and continuous, like any other organism.”4
                            It would be difficult to find any nineteenth-century cultural sphere
                    in which organic thought did not play a major role. Yet recent critics
                    have paid it scant attention, aside from casual scorn for the reactionary
                    politics many assume are intrinsic to it. George Eliot’s organicism
                    attracted major studies by Sally Shuttleworth and Suzanne Graver in
                    the 1980s; more recently, Denise Gigante and Amanda Jo Goldstein
                    have written sweeping studies of the scientific bases for romantic organic
                    form; and a few scattered essays have touched on the subject.5 But for the
                    most part critics turn a blind eye. Doubtless, such avoidance began with
                    the withering ideological critiques of traditional “organic society” by
                    Marxist critics of the 1970s: Raymond Williams, for example, called
                    organicism a “lulling illusion,” and claimed that it sustained social
                    thought “mainly of a conservative kind.”6 Powerful as this prejudice con-
                    tinues to be, the absence of a distinct, coherent intellectual tradition of
                    organic thought, as well as complex, often contrary uses of the term
                    “organic” and ideas associated with it in nineteenth-century biology, soci-
                    ology, political theory, art criticism, and literature, have been equally to
                    blame. But precisely because organicism meant such different things to
                    so many nineteenth-century thinkers, it tugged at cultural discourse
                    with powerful (if murky) undertows and cross-currents. Such conditions
                    can be a daunting but rewarding challenge for contemporary scholars.
                            Though nineteenth-century organic thought remains to be compre-
                    hensively mapped, there are several compelling reasons to give it a fresh
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000852

                                                                                                       ORG AN I C I S M             793
              look. Pace standard critical assumptions about organicism’s politics, for
              example, at least one strand of organic thought left a distinctly progres-
              sive legacy. The chief intellectual spokesman for the New Liberal welfare
              reforms of the early twentieth century, Leonard Hobhouse, explicitly
              invoked organicism as a rationale for state-sponsored unemployment
              insurance, old-age pensions, progressive taxation, estate taxes, and public
              ownership of resources and utilities: in Liberalism (1911), Hobhouse
              claimed that “no one element of the social life stands separate from the
              rest, any more than any one element of the animal body stands separate
              from the rest. In this sense the life of society is rightly held to be organic.”7
              Hobhouse spoke for an activist group of New Liberal intellectuals, many of
              whom traced their collectivist social principles back to the late writings of
              John Stuart Mill and to novelists such as Eliot and Charles Dickens. This
              political genealogy needs considerable further exploration. So does
              another, very different one: i.e., the state-centered solutions to social prob-
              lems proposed during the “paternalist revival” of the 1830s—both by social
              theorists and by the Condition of England novelists they inspired. In the
              writings and speeches of Thomas Sadlier, David Robinson, and other pater-
              nalists (who, according to Harold Perkin, anticipated Keynesian welfare
              economics) and in novels by Frances Trollope, Charlotte Elizabeth
              Tonna, and Charles Kingsley, organic social thought supported calls for
              the regulation of factory conditions, child labor laws, sanitary improve-
              ments, and other reforms that laid the foundations for a centralized welfare
              bureaucracy.8
                      A series of socially progressive elements were also routinely spliced
              into conceptions of organic society by Victorian novelists, including ten-
              dencies to relax class hierarchies, to expand social inclusiveness, to
              accommodate social mobility and cross-class circulation, and to fuse lib-
              eral individualism with service to the common good. Many novelists
              also relocated moral authority from the top of the social scale, where it
              had resided in pre-Victorian organic models, to previously marginalized
              social actors (artisans, women, artist-figures, and middle-class professionals).
                      Moreover, nineteenth-century organic thought privileged non-
              teleological growth and development, drawing on both biological
              vitalism and romantic theories of form; as a historiographical model,
              organicism encouraged the rejection of static conceptions of social struc-
              ture and process. The open-endedness of Eliot’s (in)famous meliorism is
              curiously reflected, for example, by Mill’s optimism in On Liberty (1859)
              that social progress, like individual development, resembles the ener-
              getic, internally directed, unpredictable growth of biological organisms.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000852

                    794          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    In fact, Victorian organic writing often included critiques of static con-
                    ceptions of social order associated with traditional models of organic
                    society. A notable example is the sharp contrast between a rigidly hierar-
                    chical pre-Victorian organicism and a more elastic mid-Victorian version
                    evolving out of it in Elizabeth Gaskell’s Cranford (1853). But a critique of
                    static, traditional organic society, in the name of more dynamic models,
                    can be found everywhere in Victorian fiction.
                            Victorian writers often adopted formal techniques that broke the
                    bounds of conventional literary form to express dynamically organic
                    social ideals. First-person plural narration, a turn to the epic in poetry,
                    time-traveling narratives, violations of poetic and narrative closure, and
                    breaches of the boundaries between domestic and political plots are
                    some of the many devices writers used to embody organic social models
                    in innovative formal experiments. Some of these ventures self-consciously
                    followed Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s celebration of literary forms that
                    incorporate dissonant energies. Organic thought infused nineteenth-
                    century culture in these and many other ways, which literary scholarship
                    of the last fifty years has largely neglected or repressed. It’s time for a
                    critical return to the topic.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Thomas Hardy, The Woodlanders (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1981), 59.
                    2. For an excellent summary, see James Elwick, “Herbert Spencer and the
                          Disunity of the Social Organism,” History of Science 41, no. 1 (2003): 35–
                          72.
                    3. E. P. Thompson, William Morris: Romantic to Revolutionary (New York:
                          Pantheon, 1955), 29.
                    4. Henry James, Essays on Literature, American Writers, English Writers, ed.
                          Leon Edel (New York: Library of America, 1984), 54.
                    5. Suzanne Graver, George Eliot and Community (Berkeley: University of
                          California Press, 1984); Sally Shuttleworth, George Eliot and
                          Nineteenth-Century Science: The Make-Believe of a Beginning (Cambridge:
                          Cambridge University Press, 1984); Denise Gigante, Life: Organic
                          Form and Romanticism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009);
                          Amanda Jo Goldstein, Sweet Science: Romantic Materialism and the New
                          Logics of Life (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017); recent
                          short studies include Jacek Gutorow, “Toward the Incalculable:
                          A Note on Henry James and Organic Form,” The Henry James Review
                          35, no. 3 (2014): 285–94; and Devin Griffiths, “Deforming the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000852

                                                                          O R GAN I C I SM , P E R FO R M A N CE                    795
                   Novel,” presented at the “Form and Reform” Conference, University
                   of California, Santa Cruz, July 28, 2017.
              6. Raymond Williams, The Country and the City (Oxford: Oxford
                   University Press, 1973), 180; Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and
                   Society (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976), 228.
              7. Leonard T. Hobhouse, Liberalism and Other Writings (Cambridge:
                   Cambridge University Press, 1994), 35.
              8. See Harold Perkin, Origins of Modern English Society (London:
                   Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969), 244.
              Performance
              LAUREN ERIKS CLINE
              W         HAT is Victorian about our world stage? While the criminalization
                        of poverty, the corruption of bureaucracies, and the upward redis-
              tribution of wealth has put many observers in mind of a Dickens novel,
              we might also consider a less-studied Victorian object: the spectacle.
              Take 2017. In the same year that 20th Century Fox released The Greatest
              Showman, a movie dramatizing the life of nineteenth-century circus
              impresario P. T. Barnum, political pundits also scrutinized the stunts of
              a more contemporary media figure, whose “circus-like ‘style,’” seems
              part of his “showman’s reality-TV approach to the presidency.”1 The dra-
              matic genre of the day, according to this critic, is not a Jacobean tragedy
              or even a pièce du théâtre de l’absurde, but a visually excessive, nineteenth-
              century extravaganza. If there’s something showy about the state of play,
              in other words, there’s also something Victorian about the methods of
              performance. So, what can the Victorians—who lived through what
              Tracy C. Davis and Peter Holland call “the performing century”—tell
              us about how to bear witness to the Greatest Show on Earth?2
                      For starters, nineteenth-century performance provides a privileged
              site for analyzing the power of loosely scripted spectacles. Many theater
              practitioners in Victorian London were at least as interested in exploring
              the affordances of new stage technologies as they were in dramatizing a
              particular literary text.3 A fascination with visually arresting pageantry or
              exciting musical numbers was even more operative in the minor theaters,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000852

