                                                                                         PO LIT I C S, P RO GRE SS                  809
              “the long revolution”: the open-ended, multi-fronted struggle for human
              emancipation, realization, and dignity.8 And, that, presumably, is a poli-
              tics that we can all agree upon.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Paul A. Pickering, “Class Without Words: Symbolic Communication in the
                   Chartist Movement,” Past & Present no. 112 (1986): 144–62, 157.
              2. Montgomery H. Hyde, ed., The Three Trials of Oscar Wilde (New York:
                   University Books, 1956), 236.
              3. G. W. F. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford:
                   Oxford University Press, 1977), 9.
              4. Indeed, this is a fundamental problem for the contemporary left more
                   generally. See, for example, Mark Lilla’s recent—and rather unchari-
                   table—manifesto, The Once and Future Liberal: After Identity Politics
                   (New York: Harper Collins, 2017).
              5. Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society
                   (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983).
              6. As this statement suggests, I am not persuaded that the available mod-
                   els (such as Rancière’s tripartite distinction between archipolitics, par-
                   apolitics, and metapolitics) are adequate to the task, although they are
                   certainly stimulants to thought. See Jacques Rancière, Disagreement:
                   Politics and Philosophy, trans. Julie Rose (Minneapolis: University of
                   Minnesota Press, 1999), 61–93.
              7. Ernst Bloch, “Nonsynchronism and the Obligation to Its Dialectics,”
                   trans. Mark Ritter, New German Critique no. 11 (1977): 22–38.
              8. Raymond Williams, The Long Revolution (London: Chatto & Windus,
                   1961).
              Progress
              RUTH M. MCADAMS
              A      S Victorianists, we are eager reject the ideological commitment to
                      historical progress that ostensibly dominates our culture of study.
              Although there are political and intellectual reasons to distance ourselves
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000906

                    810          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    from the self-congratulatory progress narratives that persist, remarkably,
                    even in the age of Trump, climate change, and runaway capitalism, our rejec-
                    tion of the doctrine of progress has come at the expense of exaggerating its
                    penetration in the Victorian period. In fact, the dominance of progressive or
                    “Whig” history in the nineteenth century has been vastly overstated. It was
                    always already limited, shoehorned in awkwardly among other ideas about
                    history. If we want to reckon with our own critical debts to the liberal intellec-
                    tual tradition—or if we just want progress that is equitable and just—we need
                    to have a more nuanced understanding of the fleeting and mitigated
                    Victorian theorization of historical progress.
                            As it does today, the idea of gradual, gentle, and inexorable progress
                    had a certain broad appeal that transcended political difference, despite
                    its association with the Whigs.1 A two-edged sword, it could provide the
                    impetus for progressive reforms or the complacency of understanding
                    one’s world as advanced and advancing. Despite its diffuse appeal, the
                    idea of progress was independent of and often difficult to reconcile
                    with most actual historical methods. Although progressive history does
                    not imply any specific understanding of the causes of improvement, in
                    terms of historiographical style, it seems in theory most consistent with
                    the kind of systematic dialectical unfolding theorized by Hegel and
                    Marx, which allows limited agency to individual actors—the presumption
                    of inevitable unceasing improvement must necessarily circumscribe any
                    individual’s ability to effect a particular outcome.
                            However, as Herbert Butterfield observes, Whig history tends para-
                    doxically to overstate rather than understate the agency of individuals,
                    unconvincingly crediting them with changes whose causes were arguably
                    more obscure and complex. In his System of Logic, John Stuart Mill
                    attempts to reconcile progress and greatness by suggesting that the pres-
                    ence or absence of great men “determin[es] the celerity of the move-
                    ment.”2 To this end, he takes up a metaphor from Thomas Babington
                    Macaulay, who figures the great man as standing on a mountaintop, see-
                    ing the sun’s rays just a few moments earlier than those in the valley
                    below, and thus as a modest harbinger of inevitable change. Mill empha-
                    sizes, by contrast, that the great man climbs to the mountaintop, and that
                    if he had not, his innovative ideas might have been profoundly delayed.
                    Mill does not spell it out, but in order to make his adaptation of
                    Macaulay’s metaphor work, he must presume a thick cloud covering
                    just below the summit that allows the great man to see rays of sun that
                    may never be visible from the valley. Butterfield’s critique picks up on
                    Mill’s underlying faith in individual greatness, observing the way that
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000906

                                                                                                            P RO G R E SS           811
              Luther, for example, is valorized by Whig historians for setting in motion
              the process of secularization—an outcome he certainly did not intend.
                      This investment of Whig history in the Protestant Reformation
              reflects not only its strange reliance on individual agency, but also the
              cultural and historical limits of this historiographical outlook. In the
              influential early formulation of Macaulay’s 1828 essay, “History,” he pre-
              sents the idea of progressiveness not as a truly universal feature of human
              experience, but rather as a specific historical claim about the distinction
              between antiquity and modernity. Although he expresses reservations
              about what has been lost in the transition, he contrasts modern history
              writing favorably with even the best ancient writers in that the latter
              are fundamentally limited by the stasis of their cultures.3 For Macaulay,
              the “torpor” of antiquity “was broken by . . . the victory of Christianity
              over Paganism” and the Viking invasion of Europe, which allowed for
              the establishment of the “second civilization of mankind . . . under cir-
              cumstances which afforded a strong security that it would never retro-
              grade and never pause.”4 Macaulay thus suggests only indirectly, by
              ruling out the possibilities of reversal and stagnation, that modern
              (white, Protestant) civilization is moving continually forward.
                      As this vision of progress becomes a more strident feature of philoso-
              phy of history later in the century, it retains the strong sense that progress
              had a historical point of origin at the dawn of modernity, in addition to its
              narrow cultural limits. In his 1895 inaugural lecture as Regius Professor of
              Modern History at Cambridge, Lord Acton states plainly that “this con-
              stancy of progress . . . is the characteristic fact of modern history.”5 Like
              Macaulay, Acton understands progress as delimited by an untheorized rup-
              ture, an “unheralded” transition that took place around 1600 in which the
              past was “marked off by an evident and intelligible line” from the present.6
              Acton’s argument thus leaves the pre-modern open to a different historiog-
              raphy—at one point, he suggests a trajectory of decline—and does not
              work particularly hard to understand the sudden paradigm shift that he
              himself claims is history’s most consequential.7
                      If Acton is a high-water mark for the Victorian doctrine of progress,
              sea levels have since risen. We might contrast Acton’s relative restraint
              with Steven Pinker’s celebrated The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why
              Violence Has Declined (2011), which spends several hundred pages using
              statistics to support its premise, that violence has consistently declined
              over the longue durée—from the earliest hunter-gatherer civilizations to
              the present moment, in absolutely every human culture, and on every
              scale of reference.8 Although Pinker’s positivist method and his analysis
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000906

                    812          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    have been criticized by humanists as well as statisticians, his work is a testa-
                    ment to our tremendous appetite for progress narratives, one that certainly
                    exceeds in quantity and differs in quality from the modest claims of
                    Macaulay or Acton. As we strive to understand historical change that has
                    a more ambivalent direction and as we fight for the future that we want,
                    we need to acknowledge the way that the Victorian theorization of progress
                    went hand-in-hand with its others—regress, cyclicality, stasis, and rupture.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History (London: G. Bell
                          and Sons, 1963), 4; Michael Bentley, “Shape and Pattern in British
                          Historical Writing, 1815–1945,” in The Oxford History of Historical
                          Writing, 1800–1945, Vol. 4, ed. Stuart Macintyre, Juan Maiguashca,
                          and Attila Pók (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), 208.
                    2. John Stuart Mill, A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, Being a
                          Connected View of the Principles of Evidence and the Methods of Scientific
                          Investigation, in The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, ed. J. M. Robson
                          (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1963), 8: 938 [VI. xi. 3].
                    3. Thomas Babington Macaulay, “History,” in Critical, Historical, and
                          Miscellaneous Essays (New York: Hurd and Houghton, 1878), 1: 393.
                    4. Macaulay, “History,” 416, 417.
                    5. John Emerich Edward Dalberg-Acton, “The Study of History,” in
                          Selected Writings of Lord Acton, ed. J. Rufus Fears (Indianapolis:
                          Liberty Classics, 1985): 2: 517 (emphasis added).
                    6. Dalberg-Acton, “Study,” 507.
                    7. Dalberg-Acton, “Study,” 508–10.
                    8. Steven Pinker, The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined
                          (New York: Viking, 2011).
                    Progress
                    SUE ZEMKA
                    A         belief in progress was so deeply embedded in nineteenth-century
                             Britain that it was one of those beliefs for which there was no
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000906

