                                                                                                 S CA L E , S C I E N C E           851
              12. Henry James, Preface to The Novels and Tales of Henry James: New York
                     Edition, Vol. 11 (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1908), xviii, xix.
              13. For other examples, see Morgan, “Critical Empathy: Vernon Lee’s
                     Aesthetics and the Origins of Close Reading,” Victorian Studies 55,
                     no. 1 (2012): 31–56. See also Natalia Cecire, “Ways of Not Reading
                     Gertrude Stein.” ELH 82, no. 1 (2015): 281–315.
              14. Natalie M. Houston, “Toward a Computational Analysis of Victorian
                     Poetics,” Victorian Studies 56, no. 3 (2014): 498–510, 498.
              15. Ryan Cordell, “Taken Possession Of: The Reprinting and
                     Reauthorship of Hawthorne’s ‘Celestial Railroad’ in the Antebellum
                     Religious Press,” Digital Humanities Quarterly 7, no. 1 (2013).
              16. Michael Witmore, “Text: A Massively Addressable Object,” Wine Dark
                     Sea (blog), December 31, 2010.
              Science
              MARTIN WILLIS
              T      HE most interesting of recent developments in Victorian literary
                     scholarship has been our obsession not with the Victorians but
              with ourselves. We have become fascinated by invoking the Victorians
              in order to consider our contemporary conditions. This self-
              interrogation has been both welcomed and contested. For literature
              and science scholars it has been puzzling, for Victorian literature and sci-
              ence has a long tradition of scholarly critique that takes account of both
              past and present. It has also been satisfying, since the turn towards our
              own historical moment has seen the study of literature and science
              take up a place at the very heart of Victorian literature and culture.
              This interest in our present moment and its attachments to Victorian cul-
              tures is important because it is making us think creatively about the
              future praxis of Victorian scholarship. It is enabling us to consider new
              ways of conceiving of the temporal gap between the Victorians and our-
              selves and what knowledge crossing that gap might generate.
                      This temporal turn is clear in the significant proportion of recent
              Victorian research that has focussed, for example, on ecological
              crises: from environmental violence and studies of the anthropocene
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001018

                    852          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    through energy security to animal welfare.1 There is such impetus behind
                    this work that its various specialisms often signal their intent to make
                    interventions into debates about the value of the humanities by adding
                    that term as their own suffix: environmental humanities and energy
                    humanities have joined medical humanities and others as recognisable
                    pairings.
                            In Victorian literature and science scholarship the temporal turn has
                    not been sudden but rather an evolution (no pun intended). Harriet
                    Ritvo’s first book on Victorian animals, The Animal Estate, was published
                    in 1989, and even before that, Gillian Beer’s foundational research on,
                    yes, evolution, was suffused with questions about the two cultures of sci-
                    ence and literature that spoke equally well to the present day.2 Victorian
                    literature and science’s extended interrogation of the inchoate power of
                    the sciences through the nineteenth century has always been refracted
                    through the relationships of the disciplines in the late-twentieth and
                    twenty-first century. This has given us a scholarship that is alert to differ-
                    ent forms of knowledge-making and their historical situatedness. It is
                    probably the case that Victorian literature and science scholars look to
                    the nineteenth century because it was here that so many of the relations
                    between the sciences and humanities emerged and were worked out. In
                    thinking about the value of our subject in the present day, then, it is nat-
                    ural to turn to those predecessors who might offer us ways of knowing
                    where we are and what we might do about it.
                            However, one of the problems with this and with the other recent
                    work in our temporal turn has been its inherent teleology. Only the pre-
                    sent gains from strategic attempts to consider the relations between the
                    Victorians and ourselves. As scholars of Victorian literature and culture,
                    we would surely wish our understanding of the Victorians also to be
                    enhanced?
                            In literature and science an important recalibration of methodolog-
                    ical approach is underway, and since the work of its scholars has become
                    so central to Victorian literature and culture it is worthy of wider account.
                    Literature and science scholars are beginning to investigate anew some of
                    the recursive relationships between the two disciplines and in turn how
                    the past and the present might also be seen in similarly recurring and
                    successive formations. Experiences of engagements with contemporary
                    science have shown scholars of Victorian literature and science how valu-
                    able it is to take present knowledge back into the past and apply it there.
                    One recent example of this is the Constructing Scientific Communities
                    project, one arm of which is using contemporary citizen science and its
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001018

                                                                                                               SCIENCE              853
              knowledge to reexamine histories of Victorian citizen science.3 There is a
              great deal to be gained from what Edward Bellamy called, in another
              context, looking backwards. Nor need thinking with present knowledge
              disrupt current methods if undertaken sensitively. Rather it adds to the
              kinds of questions that might be posed for, say, Victorian narratives
              and opens possibilities that the historical record itself does not easily
              reveal.
                      Some of this work is formal, on the role of actively mobile analogies
              moving both between the two disciplines of literature and science and
              also across time.4 Other work is thinking through new forms of concilia-
              tory practice where literary study and the sciences might work more
              closely together in the present and the results of that be used also to
              inform how we interrogate and come to understand the past.5 The
              ScienceHumanities Initiative at my own institution, Cardiff University,
              is a fine example of this.6 What all of this work has in common is its tem-
              poral suppleness: the present and the Victorian past are both informed
              by its research. The emerging methodologies in Victorian literature
              and science might well offer fresh impetus to the temporal turn in liter-
              ary studies. If we are to take this up, though, it requires the throwing off
              of certain disciplinary constraints. To think of temporality as unfettered is
              to accept movements that are, at least to literary scholars and historians,
              undisciplined, and perhaps unpromisingly so. As literature and science
              scholars would say, though, if we aim to understand our Victorian uni-
              verse, and ourselves, we might want to accept a more unusual physics
              where knowledge in and of the present might enact change upon knowl-
              edge of the past.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Good examples are Justine Pizzo, “Esther’s Ether: Atmospheric
                   Character in Charles Dickens’s Bleak House,” Victorian Literature and
                   Culture 42, no. 1 (2014): 81–98; and, Allen MacDuffie, Victorian
                   Literature, Energy, and the Ecological Imagination (Cambridge:
                   Cambridge University Press, 2014).
              2. Harriet Ritvo, The Animal Estate: The English and Other Creatures in the
                   Victorian Age (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1989); Gillian
                   Beer, Darwin’s Plots: Evolutionary Narrative in Darwin, George Eliot and
                   Nineteenth-Century Fiction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
                   1984).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001018

                    854          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    3. “Constructing                    Scientific        Communities,”                    https://conscicom.org.
                          (accessed 2 May 2018).
                    4. For example, the discussions and presentations of the AHRC-funded
                          seminar on analogy led by Alice Jenkins in Cambridge in 2015 or
                          Sally Shuttleworth’s recording of the movement of literary texts across
                          works of psychology in The Mind of the Child: Child Development in
                          Literature, Science and Medicine, 1840–1900 (Oxford: Oxford
                          University Press, 2010).
                    5. Jennifer Calkins’s article on reading Moby Dick in the light of current
                          cetological research is an excellent example of such work: Jennifer
                          Calkins, “How Is It Then with the Whale? Using Scientific Data to
                          Explore Textual Embodiment,” Configurations 18, no. 1–2 (2010):
                          31–47. See also John Holmes, “Consilience Rebalanced: Edward
                          O. Wilson on Science, the Humanities and the Meaning of Human
                          Existence,” Journal of Literature and Science 10, no. 1 (2017): 5–10. My
                          own forthcoming article on nineteenth-century sleep offers a further
                          new methodology: Martin Willis, “Sleeping Science Fictionally:
                          Nineteenth-Century Utopian Fictions and Sleep Research,” Osiris 34,
                          no. 1 (2019).
                    6. James Castell, Keir Waddington, and Martin Willis, “Cardiff Science
                          Humanities,” https://cardiffsciencehumanities.org (accessed 2 May
                          2018).
                    Science Fiction
                    JOHN PLOTZ
                    F      OUR decades ago, Darko Suvin floated a scholarly approach to sci-
                           ence fiction that largely still prevails, emphasizing the genre’s reliance,
                    stretching back beyond Jules Verne to Mary Shelley and beyond, on a
                    technological “novum.”1 Suvin emphasized the capacity of science fiction
                    to challenge readers’ conceptual norms by way of what (in a Shklovskyian
                    vein) he called “cognitive estrangement.” Most critical debate in the inter-
                    vening years has focused on his account of the “cognitive estrangement”
                    itself: including Seo-Young Chu’s recent provocative notion that “science
                    fiction is a representational technology powered by a combination of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001018

