                    858          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    9. J. R. R. Tolkien, “On Fairy-Stories,” Tree and Leaf (Boston: Houghton
                          Mifflin, 1964), 3–84; Mark J. P Wolf, Building Imaginary Worlds: The
                          Theory and History of Subcreation (New York: Routledge, 2012).
                    Sensation Fiction
                    MARLENE TROMP
                    I    N spite of our recognition of the blurriness of generic boundaries, we
                          tend to reassert them where sensation fiction is concerned. There is
                    value in understanding sensation in new ways—and potential political
                    consequences when we do not. This is especially significant now that
                    our critical study of sensation fiction has matured to the point that it is
                    possible to offer reviews of the critical field, like those by Anne-Marie
                    Beller and Mark Knight.1 Even the most important work in the field
                    on sensation has often reinforced the binary between sensation and real-
                    ism.2 The boldest moves have been made by scholars like Richard
                    Nemesvari, who argues that Hardy understands and deploys melodrama
                    and sensation in order to offer cultural and ideological critiques.3 While
                    challenging our sense of the genre’s impact and engagement with realist
                    fiction, it distinguishes sensation as a distinct mode. Emily Steinlight
                    offers a similar analysis of Eliot’s fiction and realist fiction more broadly
                    (as I did in The Private Rod).4
                            In spite of the careful way in which critics seek to navigate the com-
                    plex terrains of generic meaning, even these studies have persisted in
                    treating sensation fiction as an excessive hyper-genre of the “not
                    real”—a bit of flash and dazzle that emerged (or could be consciously
                    deployed) in relation to or in realist fiction for effect. This seems striking
                    given the fact that we have learned to explore real cultural phenomena
                    like marital violence, the body, property law, and science in new ways
                    from sensation fiction. While sensation often supplies the leverage to
                    read against the grain, we often (perhaps unconsciously) return it to
                    its generic box when we have completed the task.
                            One of the early critical treatments of sensation sought to blur the
                    borders between genres. In his 1982 essay on sensation fiction, Patrick
                    Brantlinger makes a Derridean argument that it is “impossible not to
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001031

                                                                                         S E NS ATI ON FI C T I ON                  859
              mix genres,”5 referring to the relationship between sensation and Gothic
              fiction and the detective novel, not realism. We must take Brantlinger’s
              argument further. Our discussions of sensation have yet to sufficiently
              addresses the fundamental Derridean notion that these binaries create
              hierarchies—hierarchies that are invested with and produce political
              and social effects. Treating sensation as an entirely distinct and subordi-
              nate term in this binary suggests the genre’s separation from the real(ist).
              There are potential political stakes to excluding realism from our analysis
              of sensation and even to reestablishing the distinctions that we have
              found so useful. While no fiction is “real,” generically subordinating sen-
              sation supplies both affective and ideological resistance to imagining that
              the matter of sensation fiction engages what is real—not as reportage on
              actual historical events, but in its portrayal of real social and affective phe-
              nomenon through the medium of fiction (one of the ways we understand
              realist fiction). Wives were sometimes confined to lunatic asylums, both
              women and men did try to murder inconvenient spouses—sometimes
              successfully. Infidelity, bigamy, deception, and interpersonal violence
              marked and sometimes saturated people’s lives. The narrative of life
              offered in sensation fiction and realist fiction are not two poles—reality
              and unreality—but instead intimately related in ways with which we
              have often failed to grapple meaningfully.
                      Treating sensation as primarily hyperbolic, symbolic, or gestural per-
              mits us to dismiss the matter of sensation and the political dynamics that
              inhered within them. By way of extended metaphor, we might consider
              Anita Hill’s testimony during the Senate hearings for Clarence
              Thomas’s Supreme Court nomination in 1991. Hill’s narrative was repeat-
              edly dismissed in the news media and public comment as “sensational”
              though many acknowledged Hill’s significance and cultural impact.
              The rendering of Hill’s testimony as “sensational”—excessive, dramatic,
              even titillating—had consequences. Americans crafted a binary structure
              in which what Hill experienced was, at best, marginal, and, at worst, fan-
              tasy. Sixty percent of Americans believed the testimony was an “embar-
              rassing spectacle” and the same percentage believed that she had
              “thought some of this stuff up in her head. Women do that sometimes.”6
              The majority of Americans believed that Hill’s story was a sensational
              fiction.
                      From its cultural birth, we treated sexual harassment as “sensation,”
              something “unreal,” or at the very least, truly exceptional. We obliquely
              distinguished it from “reality,” even while we explicitly asserted the
              value of the conversation. These often-subtle gestures not only made it
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001031

                    860          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    easier to place Clarence Thomas on the bench, but also to permit cases
                    like those of Harvey Weinstein and Matt Lauer to be largely obfuscated
                    for decades and for feminists to brace themselves for backlash when
                    they no longer are. Treating sexual harassment like a marginal unreality
                    is a Derridean failure that lends impunity to the harassers.
                            Similarly, treating sensation as if its fictional narratives somehow rep-
                    resent an unreality teaches us to dismiss this representation of murder,
                    infidelity, and deception, along with the political dimensions of those
                    social problems. Bounding sensation in this way may shore up a sense
                    of cultural safety and normalcy, but it also maintains the status quo.
                    Failing to recognize the porousness of sensational fiction and realist fic-
                    tion, sensation fiction and the real—and not just as a one-way conduit
                    that channels some sensation into realism—permits us to treat the con-
                    tent as an aberration.
                            We, as critics, must stop treating “sensation” as a synonym for “unre-
                    alistic.” We must come to think of the word “sensation” as we do the word
                    “natural”—to pause and imagine whether we are deploying it in an
                    unselfconscious way that too loosely imagines it to have firm and clear
                    boundaries and to exist in a zone that contrasts a Victorian reality or
                    the story of reality, which was—as we might imagine—much more mun-
                    dane. The real has much more of the sensational than we have allowed
                    and opening ourselves to its meaning may help us read not only the fic-
                    tion, but the social politics of the period, in new ways.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. These studies note sensation’s broader impact in the field and increas-
                          ing respectability as an object of study (Beller) and consider our ongo-
                          ing fascination with sensation (Knight). Anne-Marie Beller, “‘The
                          Fashions of The Current Season’: Recent Critical Work on Victorian
                          Sensation Fiction,” Victorian Literature and Culture 45, no. 2 (2017):
                          461–73; Mark Knight, “Figuring Out the Fascination: Recent Trends
                          in Criticism on Victorian Sensation And Crime Fiction,” Victorian
                          Literature and Culture 37, no. 1 (2009): 323–33.
                    2. In the epigraph to her important Companion to Sensation Fiction
                          (Maldon: Blackwell, 2011), Pamela K. Gilbert quotes Anthony
                          Trollope’s assessment that novels cannot be divided into two schools,
                          sensational and realistic. She remains off this terrain in her introduc-
                          tion however (Anthony Trollope, “On English Prose Fiction as a
                          Rational Amusement,” in Four Lectures by Trollope, ed. M. L. Parrish
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001031

                                                                    S E N S ATI O N FI C T I O N , S E NT I E N C E                 861
                   [London: Constable, 1938]). “Realism and Sensation Fiction” by
                   Daniel Brown, for example, makes the case that the differences
                   between the two genres can be “difficult to discern,” but notes that,
                   while the subject matter may be the same (crime, infidelity, murder),
                   the approach distinguishes the genres. The latter move, of course,
                   structurally reasserts the binarism he earlier critiqued. Daniel
                   Brown, “Realism and Sensation Fiction,” in A Companion to Sensation
                   Fiction, 105.
              3.   Richard Nemesvari, Thomas Hardy, Sensationalism, and the Melodramatic
                   Mode (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011).
              4.   Emily Steinlight, “Why Novels Are Redundant: Sensation Fiction and
                   the Overpopulation of Literature,” ELH 79, no. 2 (2012): 501–35,
                   504. She cleverly reads against the frame of W. R. Greg’s notion of
                   redundancy and argues that “criticism itself relies on the conception
                   of an overcrowded literary field in need of regulation.” See also
                   Marlene Tromp, The Private Rod: Marital Violence, Sensation, and the
                   Law in Victorian Britain (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
                   2000).
              5.   Patrick Brantlinger, “What Is ‘Sensational’ About the ‘Sensation
                   Novel’?” Nineteenth-Century Fiction 37, no. 1 (1982): 1–28, 2.
              6.   Elizabeth Kolbert, “The Thomas Nomination; Most in National
                   Survey Say Judge Is the More Believable,” The New York Times,
                   October 15, 1991.
              Sentience
              ANNA HENCHMAN
              I   N 1789, Jeremy Bentham entered a longstanding debate about
                   sentience (the ability to perceive something physical like warmth or
              cold) by asserting that animals have rights because they can feel pain:
              “The question is not Can they reason? nor, Can they talk? but, Can they
              suffer?”1 Sentience refers to a baseline form of perception, less complex
              than cognition or consciousness. It implies the presence of senses, but
              not necessarily the specialized senses of sight, hearing, smell, or taste.
              While scholarship has fruitfully investigated how Victorian writers
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001031

