                                                                    S E N S ATI O N FI C T I O N , S E NT I E N C E                 861
                   [London: Constable, 1938]). “Realism and Sensation Fiction” by
                   Daniel Brown, for example, makes the case that the differences
                   between the two genres can be “difficult to discern,” but notes that,
                   while the subject matter may be the same (crime, infidelity, murder),
                   the approach distinguishes the genres. The latter move, of course,
                   structurally reasserts the binarism he earlier critiqued. Daniel
                   Brown, “Realism and Sensation Fiction,” in A Companion to Sensation
                   Fiction, 105.
              3.   Richard Nemesvari, Thomas Hardy, Sensationalism, and the Melodramatic
                   Mode (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011).
              4.   Emily Steinlight, “Why Novels Are Redundant: Sensation Fiction and
                   the Overpopulation of Literature,” ELH 79, no. 2 (2012): 501–35,
                   504. She cleverly reads against the frame of W. R. Greg’s notion of
                   redundancy and argues that “criticism itself relies on the conception
                   of an overcrowded literary field in need of regulation.” See also
                   Marlene Tromp, The Private Rod: Marital Violence, Sensation, and the
                   Law in Victorian Britain (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
                   2000).
              5.   Patrick Brantlinger, “What Is ‘Sensational’ About the ‘Sensation
                   Novel’?” Nineteenth-Century Fiction 37, no. 1 (1982): 1–28, 2.
              6.   Elizabeth Kolbert, “The Thomas Nomination; Most in National
                   Survey Say Judge Is the More Believable,” The New York Times,
                   October 15, 1991.
              Sentience
              ANNA HENCHMAN
              I   N 1789, Jeremy Bentham entered a longstanding debate about
                   sentience (the ability to perceive something physical like warmth or
              cold) by asserting that animals have rights because they can feel pain:
              “The question is not Can they reason? nor, Can they talk? but, Can they
              suffer?”1 Sentience refers to a baseline form of perception, less complex
              than cognition or consciousness. It implies the presence of senses, but
              not necessarily the specialized senses of sight, hearing, smell, or taste.
              While scholarship has fruitfully investigated how Victorian writers
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001043

                    862          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    distinguish human beings from other animals, this essay focuses on
                    images of commonality across vegetal and human tissue. My goal is not
                    to think about what rights plants have or whether trees suffer. Instead,
                    focusing on moments in which bodies are harmed, I look at how writers
                    explore the mystery of how matter either loses or acquires sentience.
                            Debates about sentience tend to reflect one of two worldviews. The
                    first is based on dichotomies, on sharp distinctions between individuals,
                    between species, between life and death, and between consciousness
                    and reflex action. The second is a more porous worldview. It imagines
                    sentience emerging gradually, in what Erasmus Darwin calls the “first
                    specks of animated earth,” over the course of evolution.2 Thinkers
                    like the elder Darwin view sentience as a quality that matter can either
                    lose or acquire.
                            As a category of beings considered incapable of feeling, plants
                    become a focus of debates about the evolution of sentience and grada-
                    tions of feeling. Mary Kuhn writes, “We tend to think that sentience
                    divides animal existence from plant life, but the belief in shared sensibil-
                    ity actually connected plants, animals and humans in [the] early nine-
                    teenth century.”3 The word sentience took on new significance in
                    Victorian debates about the gradual evolution of biological life.
                    Initially used to refer to individual beings, “sentience” also became a phys-
                    iological term that attributed feeling to parts of bodies, such as muscle or
                    tissue.4 Theorizing animal and plant life as continuous reflected a desire
                    to get beyond epistemologies that focused narrowly on human
                    knowledge.
                            Gerard Manley Hopkins and Thomas Hardy exploit similarities
                    between human tissue and plant life to confuse commonplace distinc-
                    tions between sensate and insensate matter. In “Binsey Poplars,”
                    Hopkins creates defenseless, vulnerable surfaces by comparing the “grow-
                    ing green” wood of the tree to “a sleek and seeing ball,” a human eye-
                    ball.5 He depicts human beings as ignorant, not knowing “what we do”
                    when we cut into the bodies of trees.
                             O if we but knew what we do
                             When we delve or hew —
                             Hack and rack the growing green!
                             Since country is so tender
                             To touch, her being so slender,
                             That, like this sleek and seeing ball
                             But a prick will make no eye at all.6
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001043

                                                                                                          S E NTI E N C E           863
               “Tender” can mean either physically vulnerable or being sensitive to
              pain. The line break after “tender” highlights that ambiguity by suggest-
              ing that “country” might feel pain. The comparison between the tree and
              the “seeing” eyeball without its protective socket—round, exposed, and
              “sleek”—depicts the eye’s surface as a zone of receptivity. Hopkins’s
              poem breaks down the reader’s certainty that trees are not sentient.
              Imagining that trees might have bodies as tender and vulnerable as a
              human eyeball breeds confusion and discomfort.
                      Hardy habitually uses language we usually reserve for animal bodies
              for plants and trees. He has a lifelong preoccupation with the idea that
              trees’ wood and bark are like flesh and skin.7 In Jude the Obscure, Jude
              can “scarcely bear to see trees cut down or lopped, from a fancy that it
              hurt them; and late pruning, when the sap was up and the tree bled pro-
              fusely, had been a positive grief to him in his infancy.”8 The Return of the
              Native includes a storm scene in which “wet young beeches were under-
              going amputations, bruises, cripplings, and harsh lacerations, from which
              the wasting sap would bleed.”9 Describing the “shrivelled,” “dry,” and
              “papery” music of the “tiny trumpets” of heathbells, Hardy asks the
              reader to imagine stages that their vegetal bodies have undergone over
              the course of six months: “They were the mummied heathbells of the
              past summer, originally tender and purple, now washed colourless by
              Michaelmas rains, and dried to dead skins by October suns.”10 This nam-
              ing of plants as “mummied” and “dried to dead skins” calls attention to a
              visual and tactile similarity across plant and animal bodies. Cut a finger
              and it emits blood; cut a tree trunk and it bleeds sap. Wounds first
              bleed and then get covered over with scars.
                      Hardy’s Far from the Madding Crowd presents the reader with several
              instances in which animate matter hovers between possessing and sud-
              denly losing sentience, as when a body dies just as it is about to be
              born. Gabriel Oak’s dog chases pregnant ewes off a cliff and they lie
              “dead and dying at its foot—a heap of two hundred mangled carcasses,
              representing in their condition just now at least two hundred more.”11
              Gabriel is filled with pity for “these gentle ewes and their unborn
              lambs,” and later Bathsheba discovers the dead bodies of Fanny Robin
              and the baby that she lived just long enough to give birth to.12 The pecu-
              liar status of the dead unborn lambs and Fanny’s baby is that they possess
              a form of potential sentience that has been prematurely canceled out.
                      This scene contains a moment of visual analogy between animal and
              plant life. Gazing at Fanny’s coffin’s contents, Bathsheba likens the dead
              baby’s “cheeks” and “fists” to “mushrooms”:
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001043

                    864          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                             By the dead girl’s side, enclosed by one of her arms, was the object of the
                             search:
                                   A curious frame of Nature’s work,
                                   A flow’ret crushed in the bud,
                                   A nameless piece of Babyhood,
                             neatly apparelled in its first and last outfit for earth—a miniature wrapping
                             of white linen—with a face so delicately small in contour and substance that
                             its cheeks and the plump backs of its little fists irresistibly reminded her,
                             excited as she was, of the soft convexity of mushrooms on a dewy morning.13
                     Mushrooms are among the most fleshlike of plants, and the baby’s lack of
                    exposure to the outside air makes the fists damp, plump, and soft to the
                    touch, like mushrooms not quite uncurled. The strangeness of the compar-
                    ison—the tonal oddity of comparing a dead baby’s corpse to the flesh of
                    mushroom—works by highlighting the weird status this body has. Its body
                    has never been fully alive and exposed to the air. As Ivan Kreilkamp has
                    shown, Far from the Madding Crowd is unusual in its preoccupation with ani-
                    mate matter that refuses to stay within ordinary boundaries.14 This is most
                    vivid in these scenes of dead mothers and baby bodies almost born and
                    yet already dead. The ewes and their lambs have not yet been individuated
                    into separate beings. In a grotesque form of being born—being exposed
                    to the world when their mother’s bodies are burst open—the dying lambs
                    hover on the verge of sentience and a lack of sentience. Hardy’s confusion
                    between flowers, mushrooms, and dead bodies highlights that mysterious sta-
                    tus between being and nonbeing. And indeed, writers often explore the
                    porous model of sentience by attending to acts of injury, destruction, or
                    moments of transition from nonlife to life, or from life to death.
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. Jeremy Bentham, An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
                            Legislation (London: T. Payne, 1789), 309 (emphasis original).
                       2. Erasmus Darwin, The Temple of Nature (London: Jones and Company,
                            1825), 13.
                       3. Mary Kuhn, “Garden Variety: Botany and Multiplicity in Harriet
                            Beecher Stowe’s Abolitionism,” American Literature 87, no. 3 (2015):
                            489–516, 500. See also Oliver Sacks, “Sentience: The Mental Lives
                            of Plants and Worms,” in The River of Consciousness (New York:
                            Knopf, 2017), 61–77.
                       4. “Sentient, adj. and n.,” OED Online, http://oed.com (accessed
                            December 1, 2017).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001043

                                                                                     SE NTIENCE, SERIALITY                          865
                5. Hopkins, “Binsey Poplars,” in Poems and Prose of Gerard Manley
                     Hopkins, ed. W. H. Gardner (London: Penguin, 1985), 39.
                6. Hopkins, “Binsey Poplars,” 39.
                7. See, for instance, Rachel Ablow on his “Wounded Trees” in Victorian
                     Pain (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2018), 114–21; Suzanne
                     Keen, Thomas Hardy’s Brains: Psychology, Neurology, and Hardy’s
                     Imagination (Columbus: Ohio State University, 2014), 146; and
                     William A. Cohen on Hardy’s perpetual verbal confusions between
                     people and trees in “Arborealities: The Tactile Ecology of Hardy’s
                     Woodlanders,” 19: Interdisciplinary Studies in the Long Nineteenth
                     Century 19 (2014): n. pag, doi:10.16995/ntn.690.
                8. Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure, ed. Dennis Taylor and Patricia
                     Ingham (London: Penguin, 1998), 17.
                9. Thomas Hardy, The Return of the Native, ed. Tony Slade and Penny
                     Boumelha (London: Penguin, 1999), 207.
              10. Hardy, The Return of the Native, 56.
              11. Thomas Hardy, Far from the Madding Crowd, ed. Rosemarie Morgan
                     and Shannon Russell (London: Penguin, 2000), 32.
              12. Hardy, Far from the Madding Crowd, 33.
              13. Hardy, Far from the Madding Crowd, 259.
              14. Ivan Kreilkamp, “Pitying the Sheep in Far from the Madding Crowd,”
                     Novel: A Forum on Fiction 42, no. 3 (2009): 474–81, 478.
              Seriality
              SUSAN DAVID BERNSTEIN
              T      HE Victorian serial form has been the subject of diverse scholarly
                     explorations, most often engaging with print culture and book history,
              since the publishing industry in the mid-nineteenth century prompted an
              uptick in Victorian serial novels. The circulation of serials across national
              borders has also garnered excellent studies on the transatlantic circula-
              tions of serial novels.1 Although scholars have focused on other genres
              besides the novel that appeared in serial format, such as Alfred, Lord
              Tennyson’s Idylls of the King or Robert Browning’s The Ring and the Book,
              or even John Ruskin’s Unto this Last, the overwhelming object of interest
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001043

