                                                                                                            SERIALITY               873
              Seriality
              ROBYN WARHOL
              I   MAGINE it is January 1847 and I am an avid, middle-class novel reader
                   living in London. I have been following Charles Dickens’s huge best-
              seller, Dombey and Son, a novel I have been buying in serial installments at
              a railway bookseller’s stall just as soon as it comes out each month, since
              October of 1846. Everybody is talking about Dombey; as many as 40,000
              copies of each month’s part issue are sold, more than any of Dickens’s
              earlier works. True, there are over three million people in London at
              this time, but each of those 40,000 copies circulates through and far
              beyond its purchaser: read aloud in parlors and pubs, passed down
              from the parents to the children to the servants in a household, given
              to friends or left behind in public places, each monthly pamphlet—
              with the sea-green covers that signify Dickens’s brand—is well thumbed
              before the next month’s installment comes out. Now, in January,
              William M. Thackeray’s novel Vanity Fair begins appearing monthly in
              those same booksellers’ stalls, its bright yellow covers contrasting with
              the familiar green wrappers of Dombey. Like Dombey, it is set mainly in
              London, on streets I know well. Only about 5,000 copies of Vanity Fair’s
              installments are sold each month, but as a true fan of “modern novels”
              interested in the rivalry between the two great authors, I buy each one
              and read it every month alongside Dombey and Son.1 In March, I go to
              see The String of Pearls, or the Fiend of Fleet Street at the Britannia Theatre
              in London, excited to experience the melodrama version of a sensational
              novel that has been coming out in serial part issues since November. The
              gruesomeness of what we now know as the story of “Sweeney Todd, the
              Demon Barber,” set in a London neighborhood near the station where
              I buy my serials, resonates for me with the emotional violence Mr.
              Dombey inflicts on his wife and daughter and the social violence
              Becky Sharp both endures and perpetuates in Thackeray’s story. I con-
              tinue reading Dickens and Thackeray through the winter, spring, and
              summer, and then in October, a new bestseller hits the stands, this
              time in triple-decker volume form. Critics are raving about Jane Eyre,
              pseudonymously published by a previously unknown author, Charlotte
              Brontë. In November I rush through the installments of my other two
              novels to be able to dive into the storyworld of this phenomenally popu-
              lar work, so expensive in hardcover that I must borrow it, one volume at a
              time, from the circulating library where I pay for an annual membership.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001079

                    874          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Holding the stories of Dombey and Son and Vanity Fair in my mind as I read
                    the first volume of Jane Eyre, I am struck by the variations on a theme rep-
                    resented by the heroines of the three books: they are all motherless girls
                    left to figure out how to navigate hostile surroundings on their own, they
                    are all self-reliant and resourceful, and yet their ways of being in the
                    world are completely different from one another. Their appearing all
                    in one serial moment underlines the parallels between them. If, like
                    twentieth-century critics of these novels, I had read them separately
                    from start to finish, without experiencing their disparate themes and
                    moods simultaneously, as it were, I would have a substantially different
                    understanding of each heroine’s motives and reactions, as the critical his-
                    tory of these three novels shows. (What literary scholar ever thought to
                    compare Florence Dombey and Becky Sharp?)
                            Victorian readers of new novels would follow multiple stories at the
                    same time, just as modern audiences follow TV serials, turning their
                    attention from one storyworld to the next while waiting for subsequent
                    installments to appear, and holding many plots in their minds simultane-
                    ously. Processing stories in this way has a significant bearing on how read-
                    ers interpret, categorize, and evaluate them. Today, however, most
                    people who read or study Victorian serial novels encounter them in vol-
                    ume form, taking in one book from cover to cover before picking up
                    another, even if they pay attention to the serial breaks. Some organiza-
                    tions have recently initiated serial reading events featuring novels by
                    Dickens and others, offering readers the opportunity to read installments
                    of a Victorian novel in real time along with other readers, one installment
                    per week or month, while blogs, tweets, and Facebook posts create a
                    forum for discussing the text at the same monthly pace as the novel’s
                    original readers would have followed.2 When serial reading projects
                    offer online access to facsimiles of the original periodicals or
                    part-issues—making possible what Linda K. Hughes has called “reading
                    sideways” through the articles, stories, poems, and ads that appeared
                    alongside the novel installments in the original publications—the experi-
                    ence is an even richer approximation of what the original audience
                    would have done.3
                            What has been missing from current experiments in Victorian serial
                    reading, however, is the opportunity to read parts of a novel concurrently
                    with others that appeared in the same month and year, or what Helena
                    Michie calls “reading synchronically.”4 To make this possible, I have built
                    “Reading Like a Victorian,” a webtool that indexes and links installments
                    of novels to others appearing in their same “serial moment,” available at
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001079

                                                                                                            SERIALITY               875
              victorianserialnovels.org. Based at first on J. Don Vann’s inventory of
              serial installments and moving from there to our own research into pub-
              lication dates and venues, Colleen Morrissey and I are attempting to give
              present-day readers access to serial moments that span the whole
              Victorian period.5
                      We can read like Victorians by attending to installments of novels in
              their serial moments, but it would be naïve to imagine we could read as
              Victorians. Individual members of the original audience would have
              picked up installments randomly, skipped portions they happened not
              to buy, stopped reading a novel halfway through, or put off reading a
              novel until it came out in volume form. And, too, their assumptions, pre-
              occupations, prejudices, and priorities would have been different from
              ours. Synchronic serial reading is not intended to be historical reenact-
              ment, but an intervention in the twenty-first-century criticism of
              nineteenth-century literature. If the longstanding interpretations, classifi-
              cations, and reputations of canonical and noncanonical novels have
              grown out of reading them in volume form, then breaking those novels
              back down into their part-issue installments and reading them alongside
              the other texts in their respective “stacks” can help us think about our
              object of study not as a discrete novel-text read horizontally, as it were,
              from beginning to end, but as a series of texts to be read vertically,
              equally as connected to other novels in its serial moment as to its own
              later installments. Reading in the serial moment can change our under-
              standing of what the very form of “a Victorian novel” is.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Robert L. Patten, “The Fight at the Top of the Tree: Vanity Fair vs.
                   Dombey and Son,” Studies in English Literature, 1500–1900 10, no. 4
                   (1970): 759–73. Patten has detailed the impact of serial publication
                   on this rivalry.
              2. Recent experiments in serial reading include a coordinated reading in
                   2015 of Our Mutual Friend for “Dickens Day” at Birkbeck College and
                   Susan Bernstein’s blog, “Serial Readers,” launched in 2008. See Ben
                   Winyard, “The Our Mutual Friend Reading Project, ‘May We Meet
                   Again’: Rereading the Dickensian Serial in the Digital Age.”
                   Interdisciplinary Studies in the Long 19th Century, https://19.bbk.ac.uk/
                   articles/10.16995/ntn.737.
              3. Linda K. Hughes, “SIDEWAYS! Navigating the Material(ity) of Print
                   Culture,” Victorian Periodical Review 47, no. 1 (2014): 1–30.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001079

                    876          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    4. Helena Michie, “Victorian(ist) Sentences: Synchronic Temporalities,”
                          in On Periodization: Selected Essays from the English Institute, ed. Virginia
                          Jackson (2010), http://hdl.handle.net/2027/heb.90047.0001.001.
                    5. J. Don Vann, Victorian Novels in Serial (New York: Modern Language
                          Association, 1985).
                    Settler Colonialism
                    MELISSA FREE
                    B       RITISH settler colonies, colonies of occupation, and plantation
                             colonies were built on unequal relationships between colonizer and
                    colonized, and entailed the correlative exploitation of distant land,
                    labor, and other resources.1 While distinguishing between them is useful,
                    the terms themselves are Eurocentric constructs, even as they denote mate-
                    rial realities; the lines between them are not hard and fast; and no two col-
                    onies were exactly alike. British residents of colonies of occupation (like
                    India and Hong Kong) were temporary and largely male. These mer-
                    chants, missionaries, soldiers, and administrators (who, particularly in
                    the latter two cases, sometimes moved between colonies) formed a “thin
                    white line” of control over indigenous populations.2 British residents of
                    planation colonies (like those in the Caribbean) were only somewhat
                    more permanent. These mostly upper-class plantation owners often spent
                    months or even years in Britain, where their wives and children, if they
                    had them, were as likely as not to reside. Because the Caribbean’s indigenous
                    population had been all but destroyed through contact with earlier
                    European settlers, the British generated a labor force by importing
                    Africans as slaves and Indians as indentured servants. Though non-whites
                    outnumbered whites significantly, resistance—to poor working conditions,
                    slavery (pre-1833), and other forms of inequality—was met with brutal repri-
                    sal. As in colonies of occupation, resources flowed out.
                            Settler colonies (in the nineteenth century, primarily Canada,
                    Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa) were distinct from colonies
                    of occupation and plantation colonies in that large numbers of British
                    men, women, and children emigrated to them with the intent to remain
                    permanently. These several million Britons (more than 1.5 million
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001079

