                                                                           S T U PI D I T Y, S U S TA I N A B I L I T Y             895
              16. Austen, Pride and Prejudice, 55–6.
              17. If not entirely universal, it is nevertheless ordinary.
              Sustainability
              DEANNA K. KREISEL
              “S        USTAINABILITY ” generally means the ability to be maintained at
                         a certain level, but in recent years the word has come to refer
              almost exclusively to environmental sustainability: the perhaps fantastical
              set of circumstances under which life may continue on this planet under
              conditions similar to those prevailing now.1 While the word “sustainable”
              was not used in the contemporary sense of minimizing environmental
              impact until 1976,2 the concept has a much older history: historians of
              northern Europe, particularly Germany, have traced the development
              of sustainable forestry management and other agricultural practices
              back to the middle ages.3 But the concept (or perhaps we should say
              anxiety) really got a kick-start with the publication of the Reverend
              Thomas Malthus’s Essay on the Principle of Population in 1798.4 The argu-
              ment of that work was simply that population increases geometrically
              while food supply increases arithmetically; the two upward curves meet
              at a crisis point where famine becomes inevitable and population growth
              will thus be “checked.”5 The enormous cultural impact of Malthus’s the-
              sis is one good reason to date the birth of the modern sustainability idea
              to the nineteenth century. Others include the sharp increase in environ-
              mental stressors—in terms of pressure on both resources and environ-
              mental sinks—occasioned by the industrial revolution, and the birth of
              political economy as a professional discipline in the early decades of
              the century.6
                      For sustainability is essentially an economic question. Its two central
              components are issues with which political economists have long grap-
              pled: population and resources, including food. (Two other important
              components of sustainability could be mentioned: the management of
              waste, including carbon sinks, and climate change. Waste recycling was
              an important topic in the nineteenth century, but it was almost always
              invoked in the context of soil fertilization.7 And while Jesse Oak Taylor
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001134

                    896          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    has demonstrated that anxiety over pollution was a crucial part of “green”
                    Victorian consciousness—and late-Victorian texts such as Richard
                    Jefferies’s After London and M. P. Shiel’s The Purple Cloud evince a signifi-
                    cant concern with what we can loosely term “climate”—the pressing fear
                    of imminent environmental and economic collapse due to climate
                    change is of course not a prominent feature of popular discourse until
                    the late twentieth, or even twenty-first, century.8)
                            Victorian discussions of population and resources together, then,
                    form a proto-sustainability discourse that closely prefigures our own. In
                    addition to Malthus, whose thesis influenced a wide range of Victorian
                    thinkers including Darwin, a central figure in the population debate
                    was William Forster Lloyd, whose Two Lectures on the Checks to Population
                    (1833) introduced the concept of the tragedy of the commons, which
                    occurs “when the constitution of society is such as to diffuse the effects
                    of individual acts throughout the community at large, instead of appro-
                    priating them to the individuals, by whom they are respectively commit-
                    ted.”9 The “individual acts” in this case are the decisions to marry and
                    bear children, and the “effects” are the costs of care and feeding of
                    the results. Lloyd effectively extends Malthus’s dismal prognosis by not-
                    ing that, because of this diffusion of costs, rationality and restraint are
                    not effective checks on population: “the simple fact of a country being
                    over populous . . . is not, of itself, sufficient evidence that the fault lies
                    in the people themselves.”10
                            On the resources side, writers such as William Stanley Jevons,
                    Edward Hull, and William Armstrong worried that economic crisis was
                    inevitable due not to the exhaustion of food supply but instead to the
                    depletion of fossil fuel resources.11 The “coal question” debate of the
                    1860s was in many ways a continuation of earlier anxieties about wood
                    and forest management, with the added ingredient of a post-Lyell
                    sense of the vast time scales involved in the creation of fossil fuels (ren-
                    dering them effectively and practically nonrenewable). As Benjamin
                    Morgan has argued in a recent discussion of the “coal imaginary,”
                    “new scales of energy use and of geological time shared certain figural
                    and rhetorical resolutions.”12 Elizabeth Carolyn Miller’s recent work
                    has considered the narrative formations attendant upon these resolu-
                    tions in the work of William Morris, George Eliot, Joseph Conrad, and
                    others.13
                            The conceptual synthesis of long-term population and resource
                    management is the stationary or steady-state economy—characterized
                    by a zero rate of profit and growth, a fixed stock of wealth, and a stable
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001134

                                                                                                 S U S TA I N A B I L I T Y         897
              population—which is a direct nineteenth-century precursor to certain
              strains of economic/environmental sustainability. While Adam Smith
              and David Ricardo lamented the stationary state as the inevitable and
              unfortunate future of capitalism (Marx referred to the stationary state
              as the “bourgeois ‘Twilight-of-the-Gods’”), later thinkers such as
              J. S. Mill and John Ruskin heralded the stationary state as, in Mill’s
              words, “a very considerable improvement on our present condition.”14
              Steady-state economies are thus the conceptual obverse (either voluntary
              or involuntary) of capitalism, which is characterized by perpetual
              growth—which often relies on colonial markets, resources, or labor
              secured by violent appropriative imperial expansion.15 Recent versions
              of zero- (or even negative-) growth economies in response to ongoing
              environmental crisis have been championed by ecological economists,
              most prominently Herman Daly.16
                      The sustainability concept has recently absorbed a number of direct
              body blows from the academic left. Important recent critiques by Stacy
              Alaimo, Allan Stoekl, Jeremy Davies, and Leerom Medovoi, among oth-
              ers, have pointed out the inconsistencies, contradictions, and even out-
              right bad faith inherent in the concept.17 As Davies eloquently notes,
              “to talk of sustainability and steady-state economics is to deal in abstrac-
              tions that would be equally applicable at any time; it is to engage in a
              romance of stasis.”18 In other words, sustainability discourse attends to
              spatial constraints (resources, population, the “carrying capacity” of the
              planet) while fantasizing that temporal constraints can be overcome—
              that the current state of affairs can go on nearly forever.
                      Criticisms of this kind are cognate with the strain of queer theory,
              emerging from the work of Leo Bersani and Lee Edelman, skeptical of
              “reproductive futurity.” One of the unstated—and nearly unstatable—
              assumptions of sustainability discourse, after all, is that we should care
              about the future of humanity: this is an assumption that makes sense
              only in the context of a commitment to the reproduction of our spe-
              cies, if not ourselves. The paradox of futurity was intuited long ago by
              our dismal population theorist William Forster Lloyd, who noted that
              when the consequences of individual actions are borne by the social
              body, “the future is struck out of the reckoning.”19 The problem
              with thinking about environmental stewardship as sustainability is
              that to care about the future in these terms one must have a personal
              investment in it, but because of Malthusian population dynamics the
              planet cannot indefinitely maintain all of the personal investments
              needful.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001134

                    898          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. Even at this very high level of abstraction, the concept raises many unan-
                            swerable questions. Sustainability for whom or what? The thoroughly
                            anthropocentric Brundtland Report (officially entitled Our Common
                            Future) defines sustainable development as meeting “the needs of the
                            present without compromising the ability of future generations to
                            meet their own needs.” Even assuming sustainability is for future
                            generations of humans (a pretty big assumption), we are left with enor-
                            mous questions. All human beings? How many? At what standard of
                            existence? And for how long? Further, these basic questions don’t
                            even begin to address the problem of exactly how this state of sustainabil-
                            ity is to be brought about. Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission
                            on Environment and Development, Chapter 2, “Towards Sustainable
                            Development,” http://www.un-documents.net/ocf-02.htm#IV.
                       2. Every essay on sustainability is legally required to begin with the
                            term’s usage history according to the OED. Recent excellent treat-
                            ments of the concept by Allen MacDuffie and Leerom Medovoi go
                            further, unearthing tensions in the word’s etymological history that
                            imply its inherent incoherence or untenability. Allen MacDuffie,
                            Victorian Literature, Energy, and the Ecological Imagination (Cambridge:
                            Cambridge University Press, 2014), 102–04; and Leerom Medovoi,
                            “A Contribution to the Critique of Political Ecology: Sustainability
                            as Disavowal,” New Formations 69 (2010), 129–43,130–32.
                       3. See Ulrich Grober, Sustainability: A Cultural History, trans. Ray
                            Cunningham (Totnes: Green Books, 2012) and Paul Warde, “The
                            Invention of Sustainability,” Modern Intellectual History 8, no. 1
                            (2011), 153–70.
                       4. Thomas Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population (Library of
                            Economics and Liberty, 2000), http://www.econlib.org/library/
                            Malthus/malPop1.html.
                       5. The food curve can be pushed upward by technological advances
                            that increase production; it was widely believed that the invention
                            of nitrogen fertilizers in the early twentieth century solved (or at
                            least indefinitely delayed) the Malthusian conundrum. However,
                            the environmental impacts of the byproducts of chemical fertilizers
                            (along with those of monoculture crops and other agribusiness prac-
                            tices) have put paid to that fantasy. I am grateful to Benjamin
                            Morgan for this insight. (Malthus’s own suggested solution—perhaps
                            an equally fantastic one—was abstinence and late marriage.)
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001134

                                                                                                 S U S TA I N A B I L I T Y         899
                6. For a recent excellent treatment of the economic-environmental
                     impacts of the industrial revolution, see Andreas Malm, Fossil
                     Capital: The Rise of Steam Power and the Roots of Global Warming
                     (New York: Verso, 2016).
                7. Catherine Gallagher notes that both John Ruskin and Charles
                     Dickens imagined a possibly self-sustaining sanitation system in
                     which bodily products and remains (including corpses, human
                     waste, and blood products) would nourish further production in a
                     closed and infinite cycle of renewal. As Justus von Liebig laments
                     in 1840, “When we consider the immense value of night-soil
                     [human waste] as a manure, it is quite astounding that so little atten-
                     tion is paid to preserve it. The quantity is immense which is carried
                     down by the drains in London to the River Thames, serving no other
                     purpose than to pollute its waters. . . . [T]he value of the manure
                     thus lost amounts annually to several millions of pounds sterling.”
                     Catherine Gallagher, The Body Economic: Life, Death, and Sensation in
                     Political Economy and the Victorian Novel (Princeton: Princeton
                     University Press, 2006), 100–07; Justus von Liebig, Chemistry, In Its
                     Application to Agriculture and Physiology (Cambridge: John Owen,
                     1842), 194n (emphasis original).
                8. Jesse Oak Taylor, The Sky of Our Manufacture: The London Fog in British
                     Fiction from Dickens to Woolf (Charlottesville: University of Virginia
                     Press, 2016); Richard Jefferies, After London (Mineola: Dover
                     Publications, 2015); M. P. Shiel, The Purple Cloud (London:
                     Penguin Classics, 2012).
                9. William Forster Lloyd, Two Lectures on the Checks to Population, rpt. as
                     “W. F. Lloyd on the Checks to Population,” Population and Development
                     Review 6, no. 3 (1980), 479. The term “tragedy of the commons” was
                     coined by Garrett Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Science
                     162, no. 3859 (1968), 1243–48.
              10. Lloyd, Two Lectures, 480.
              11. William Stanley Jevons, The Coal Question: An Enquiry Concerning the
                     Progress of the Nation (London: Macmillan, 1865); Edward Hull, The
                     Coal-Fields of Great Britain: Their History, Structure and Duration
                     (London: Edward Stanford, 1861); William Armstrong, “Address of
                     the President,” Report of the Thirty-Third Meeting of the British
                     Association for the Advancement of Science (London: John Murray, 1864).
              12. Benjamin Morgan, “Scalar Rupture: Coal at the Holocene/
                     Anthropocene Boundary” (Unpublished ms., 2017), 3.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001134

                    900          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    13. Elizabeth Carolyn Miller, “William Morris, Extraction Capitalism,
                            and the Aesthetics of Surface,” Victorian Studies 57, no. 3 (2015):
                            395–404, and “Extraction Ecologies and Victorian Literature,” key-
                            note address, North American Victorian Studies Association
                            Conference (Banff, Canada, November 18, 2017).
                    14. John Stuart Mill, Principles of Political Economy with some of their
                            Applications to Social Philosophy (Library of Economics and Liberty),
                            http://www.econlib.org/library/Mill/mlP61.html;                                               Karl        Marx,
                            Theories of Surplus Value, trans. G. A. Bonner and Emile Burns
                            (New York: International, 1952), 427.
                    15. As Jason W. Moore points out, the “endless frontier strategy of histor-
                            ical capitalism is premised on a vision of the world as interminable:
                            this is the concept of capital and its theology of limitless substitutabil-
                            ity” (Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital
                            [New York: Verso, 2015], 66).
                    16. Herman E. Daly, Steady-State Economics, 2nd. ed. (Washington, DC:
                            Island Press, 1991) and Beyond Growth: The Economics of Sustainable
                            Development (Boston: Beacon Press, 1996).
                    17. Stacy Alaimo, “Sustainable This, Sustainable That: New Materialisms,
                            Posthumanism, and Unknown Futures,” PMLA 127, no. 3 (2012):
                            558–64; Allan Stoekl, “‘After the Sublime,’ After the Apocalpyse:
                            Two Versions of Sustainability in Light of Climate Change,”
                            Diacritics 41, no. 3 (2013): 40–57; Jeremy Davies, The Birth of the
                            Anthropocene (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2016);
                            Medovoi, “Contribution.”
                    18. Davies, The Birth of the Anthropocene, 198–99.
                    19. Lloyd, Two Lectures, 479.
                    Technology
                    CHARLIE TYSON
                    W          E live in a built world, one the Victorians helped make. The rooms
                               in which we live and work are filled with clothespins, books, light-
                    bulbs, and other marks of material culture. Modern industrial societies
                    are artefactual, however, not just in their manifest contents but in their
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001134

