                    900          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    13. Elizabeth Carolyn Miller, “William Morris, Extraction Capitalism,
                            and the Aesthetics of Surface,” Victorian Studies 57, no. 3 (2015):
                            395–404, and “Extraction Ecologies and Victorian Literature,” key-
                            note address, North American Victorian Studies Association
                            Conference (Banff, Canada, November 18, 2017).
                    14. John Stuart Mill, Principles of Political Economy with some of their
                            Applications to Social Philosophy (Library of Economics and Liberty),
                            http://www.econlib.org/library/Mill/mlP61.html;                                               Karl        Marx,
                            Theories of Surplus Value, trans. G. A. Bonner and Emile Burns
                            (New York: International, 1952), 427.
                    15. As Jason W. Moore points out, the “endless frontier strategy of histor-
                            ical capitalism is premised on a vision of the world as interminable:
                            this is the concept of capital and its theology of limitless substitutabil-
                            ity” (Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital
                            [New York: Verso, 2015], 66).
                    16. Herman E. Daly, Steady-State Economics, 2nd. ed. (Washington, DC:
                            Island Press, 1991) and Beyond Growth: The Economics of Sustainable
                            Development (Boston: Beacon Press, 1996).
                    17. Stacy Alaimo, “Sustainable This, Sustainable That: New Materialisms,
                            Posthumanism, and Unknown Futures,” PMLA 127, no. 3 (2012):
                            558–64; Allan Stoekl, “‘After the Sublime,’ After the Apocalpyse:
                            Two Versions of Sustainability in Light of Climate Change,”
                            Diacritics 41, no. 3 (2013): 40–57; Jeremy Davies, The Birth of the
                            Anthropocene (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2016);
                            Medovoi, “Contribution.”
                    18. Davies, The Birth of the Anthropocene, 198–99.
                    19. Lloyd, Two Lectures, 479.
                    Technology
                    CHARLIE TYSON
                    W          E live in a built world, one the Victorians helped make. The rooms
                               in which we live and work are filled with clothespins, books, light-
                    bulbs, and other marks of material culture. Modern industrial societies
                    are artefactual, however, not just in their manifest contents but in their
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001146

                                                                                                     T E C HN O LOGY                901
              deep contours. We are powered, connected, and fed by vast systems of
              transportation, waste disposal, and electricity. A blossoming of scholar-
              ship in “thing theory” has focused on the former category of objects—
              on private, often domestic, commodities such as chairs, curtains, and
              doorknobs.1 Only recently have literary and cultural scholars turned
              their attention to infrastructural systems such as highways and electrical
              grids.2 Yet infrastructure, these scholars find, is boring. Distant from
              the “glamor of the commodity” and defined by aspirations toward pre-
              dictability and regularity, infrastructure is noticeable only when pipes
              hiss or lights flicker off.3
                      The concept of the “technological sublime”—feelings of awe and
              terror aroused by impressive-yet-alien technologies such as aviation or
              artificial intelligence—captures the estrangement many people feel
              from the technologies that undergird their existence. This estrangement
              is produced by the discrepancy between large-scale technological systems
              and the human frame of reference. By casting the encounter between
              human being and technological apparatus in aesthetic terms, the “tech-
              nological sublime” opens the way for literary and cultural scholars to con-
              sider the perceptual qualities involved in such encounters.4
                      At the heart of the technological sublime lies a paradox. Edmund
              Burke’s Philosophical Enquiry (1757) identifies the sublime strongly with
              objects in the natural world: the “gloomy forest,” the “howling wilder-
              ness,” and the “starry heaven”; the lion, panther, and rhinoceros; the
              cries of animals.5 In the industrial age and after, a new site of sublimity
              emerged. The technological systems that altered patterns of economic
              and daily life for wealthy nations in the nineteenth and early twentieth
              centuries—such systems as railroads, electric power, and aviation—fre-
              quently achieved, in their scale, power, and strangeness, a form of the
              sublime.6 Yet, how can technological instruments designed by human
              beings and under human command stir the feelings of terror and lack
              of control Burke holds as requisite for sublimity?
                      Burke draws just one example of the sublime—the noise of artillery
              —from technology.7 Many of his examples, however, come from architec-
              ture. Built artifacts that seem to have required immense labor for their
              construction, or which achieve an “artificial infinite” by means of succes-
              sive, uniform parts (such as seemingly endless rows of pillars), achieve a
              sublime grandeur.8 We might think that technological systems could be
              ushered into Burke’s category of the sublime under the same rubric
              that admits architecture. Burke’s discussion of “use,” however, gives us
              cause for hesitation: “Whenever strength is only useful, and employed
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001146

                    902          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    for our benefit or our pleasure, then it is never sublime.” That which acts
                    “in conformity to our will” can never be the cause of a grand, terrifying
                    conception.9 Technological systems possess tremendous power, but they
                    are also objects of use.
                            The technological sublime, the historian David Nye suggests, may be
                    a distinctively American category. A sense of awe directed at American
                    technological achievements, often experienced in crowds, has since the
                    early national period, Nye contends, produced momentary bonds of
                    democratic solidarity while consecrating technological objects with meta-
                    physical significance.10
                            Yet across the Atlantic in the early decades of the nineteenth cen-
                    tury, British cities, too, were being transfigured by structures at once
                    vast and unsettling—gas works, railway stations, tunnels, aqueducts, and
                    factories. (Some elements of city planning that initially struck Victorian
                    elites as sublime would later seem just ugly.11) Observing Birmingham
                    in the 1820s, Thomas Carlyle wrote: “Torrents of thick smoke . . . are issu-
                    ing from a thousand funnels . . . You hear the clank of innumerable
                    steam-engines, the rumbling of cars and vans . . . I have looked into
                    their iron works where 150,000 men are smelting the metal in a district
                    a few miles to the north; . . . their tubs and vats, as large as country
                    churches.”12 The figures Carlyle reports are large (“a thousand funnels
                    . . . 150,000 men”) but never exact; of the steam-engines that clank
                    and whine, he can say only that they are “innumerable.” His description
                    achieves what Caroline Levine calls the “enormity effect,” a rhetorical
                    strategy that draws on the tradition of the sublime “to train readers to
                    extrapolate a vast world” beyond a text’s limited frame of reference.13
                    Carlyle invites us to imagine technological and economic transforma-
                    tions of dizzying scale, gesturing toward an uncountable magnitude by
                    means of suggestive approximation.
                            A similar fascination with the engineering feats accomplished daily
                    by the railways was, Paul Fyfe observes, widespread among Victorian
                    travelers. F. S. Williams, a railway booster and author of the popular rail-
                    way history Our Iron Roads, recorded his awe at the “immense number of
                    passengers and enormous bulk of goods . . . drawn by engines of the most
                    complicated mechanism, held together with millions of rivets, each
                    engine containing an intricate network of tubes, numerous cranks, and
                    other delicate pieces of workmanship . . . In every separate item of all
                    these innumerable parts lurk elements of danger, and the slightest frac-
                    ture may produce disaster.”14 The railways’ mechanical components are
                    (again) “innumerable”: they defy normal human comprehension and
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001146

                                                                                                     T E C HN O LOGY                903
              exact representation. Here we see how evidence of human ingenuity—
              the carefully designed rivets and cranks and gears—can, when sustained
              at scale, become overawing for any single person (excepting, perhaps, a
              well-trained engineer). Ordinary Victorian travelers, anxious about boiler
              explosions or mechanical failures, could only surrender themselves to
              the intermingled feelings of admiration and dread constitutive of sub-
              lime experience.
                      These preliminary examples suggest that something akin to the tech-
              nological sublime, no doubt distinct from the well-documented
              American variant, was a feature of nineteenth-century British culture.
              Cases where the technological sublime is conspicuously marginal, how-
              ever, can be just as revealing. One might expect that the telegraph sys-
              tem, with undersea cables stretching from Britain to India, would stir
              feelings of awe and effacement among nineteenth-century observers.15
              Yet, one of the most common metaphors used by Victorian commenta-
              tors to describe the telegraph can be characterized as anti-sublime.
              Victorian writers and technologists repeatedly likened the electric tele-
              graph to the human nervous system. The networks of cables were the
              nerves, carrying electric messages from one site to another. The tele-
              graph office, where signals were received and transmitted, was the
              brain.16 Victorian elites thereby assimilated a complex technological sys-
              tem into a human frame of reference. Human power was not effaced by
              the telegraph but amplified; the telegraph conducted “intelligence”
              through circuits that mimicked and extended the workings of the
              human body.
                      The Victorian metaphor of the telegraph as human body is reveal-
              ing, because representations of technology aimed at stirring a sense of
              sublimity often do so by abandoning reference to the human body and
              human labor. (Thus marketing materials for the nineteenth-century
              American transcontinentals routinely omitted mention of workers and
              machine operators, instead depicting the enormous locomotives as self-
              propelled beings, steely gleams streaking west across the continent.17)
              The technological sublime frequently accompanies human erasure.
                      This pattern of human effacement in cultural responses to large tech-
              nological systems—the steam engines too numerous to count; the rivets
              and tubes too intricately organized for a single mind to comprehend—
              suggests a lingering truth in Burke’s insight that use value, even when
              joined to great power, strips an object of obscurity and terror. With the dele-
              tion or minimization of human involvement, technological systems begin
              to appear autonomous, untrammeled from considerations of use.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001146

                    904          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                             Yet the Victorian technological sublime (and anti-sublime) reveals
                    something else, too, about the relation between complex technological
                    systems and the human frame of reference. Strictly speaking, we as
                    human beings, or at least our engineers, control the vast systems that
                    shape our lives. But the more typical felt experience may be that those
                    systems rule us instead.
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. See Elaine Freedgood, The Ideas in Things: Fugitive Meaning in the
                            Victorian Novel (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006).
                       2. Michael Rubenstein, Bruce Robbins, and Sophia Beal,
                            “Infrastructuralism: An Introduction,” Modern Fiction Studies 61,
                            no. 4 (2015): 575–86; Caroline Levine, “Infrastructuralism, or the
                            Tempo of Institutions,” in On Periodization: Selected Essays from the
                            English Institute, ed. Virginia Jackson (ACLS Humanities E-Book,
                            2010).
                       3. Rubenstein, Robbins, and Beal, “Infrastructuralism,” 577.
                       4. So far, the term has been lodged in the history of American technol-
                            ogy as a way of describing American technophilia; see David Nye,
                            American Technological Sublime (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1994). The
                            intellectual historian Perry Miller coined the term in The Life of the
                            Mind in America (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World 1965).
                       5. Edmund Burke, A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the
                            Sublime and Beautiful, ed. Adam Phillips (Oxford: Oxford University
                            Press, 1990), 53, 71, 61, 77.
                       6. Nye, American Technological Sublime, xi-xx.
                       7. Burke, Philosophical Enquiry, 75.
                       8. Burke, Philosophical Enquiry, 68–71.
                       9. Burke, Philosophical Enquiry, 60–61.
                    10. Nye, American Technological Sublime, xiv.
                    11. Nicholas Taylor, “The Awful Sublimity of the Victorian City,” in The
                            Victorian City: Images and Realities, Vol. 2, ed. H. J. Dyos and
                            Michael Wolff (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973), 434.
                    12. Quoted in Herbert Sussman, “Industrial,” in A New Companion to
                            Victorian Literature and Culture, ed. Herbert F. Tucker (Oxford:
                            Blackwell, 2014), 249.
                    13. Caroline Levine, “The Enormity Effect: Realist Fiction, Literary
                            Studies, and the Refusal to Count,” Genre 50, no. 1 (2017): 59–75.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001146

                                                                              TE CHNOLO GY, TE LEOLOGY                              905
              14. Quoted in Paul Fyfe, By Accident or Design: Writing the Victorian
                     Metropolis (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), 189–90.
              15. Tom Standage, The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the
                     Telegraph and the Nineteenth Century’s On-line Pioneers (New York:
                     Walker and Company, 1998), 102–03.
              16. Iwan Rhys Morus, “‘The Nervous System of Britain’: Space, Time,
                     and the Electric Telegraph in the Victorian Age,” British Journal for
                     the History of Science 33, no. 4 (2000): 455–75.
              17. Richard White, Railroaded: The Transcontinentals and the Making of
                     Modern America (New York: Norton, 2011), 225–28.
              Teleology
              DEVIN GRIFFITHS
                      [It] would not, after all, be a bad sort of teleology to keep it in mind, as a
                      heuristic fiction or Kantian ‘idea’, in the midst of our political action. . . .
                      Teleology usually involves the assumption that there is some potential in
                      the present which could result in a particular sort of future. But this need
                      not mean that this potential lurks within the present like petals within a
                      bud. It is present rather in the sense that I have a potential to travel up to
                      Glasgow right now, which is hardly some kind of secret structure of my
                      being. Teleology here is just a way of describing where I am in the light of
                      where I could feasibly get to.
                                                               —Terry Eagleton, The Illusions of Postmodernism1
              F     EW words were as reviled in literary criticism and theory of the eight-
                    ies, nineties, and early aughts as “teleology.” It seems strange when
              you remember that teleology—derived from the Greek world t<U+03AD><U+03BB><U+03BF><U+03C2>,
              “end” or “purpose”—simply means interpreting things in relation to
              their possible goal or outcome. It’s hard to imagine reading a novel with-
              out any consideration of its conclusion, or a sonnet without considering
              what its volta seems to do. And, as Eagleton notes, you can’t interpret
              (much less formulate) politics without addressing the question of pur-
              pose, the ends desired as well as the means by which those ends might
              be achieved. In our current moment, as we grapple with the problem
              of climate change and collective action, as we struggle to figure out
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001146

