                                                                              TE CHNOLO GY, TE LEOLOGY                              905
              14. Quoted in Paul Fyfe, By Accident or Design: Writing the Victorian
                     Metropolis (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), 189–90.
              15. Tom Standage, The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the
                     Telegraph and the Nineteenth Century’s On-line Pioneers (New York:
                     Walker and Company, 1998), 102–03.
              16. Iwan Rhys Morus, “‘The Nervous System of Britain’: Space, Time,
                     and the Electric Telegraph in the Victorian Age,” British Journal for
                     the History of Science 33, no. 4 (2000): 455–75.
              17. Richard White, Railroaded: The Transcontinentals and the Making of
                     Modern America (New York: Norton, 2011), 225–28.
              Teleology
              DEVIN GRIFFITHS
                      [It] would not, after all, be a bad sort of teleology to keep it in mind, as a
                      heuristic fiction or Kantian ‘idea’, in the midst of our political action. . . .
                      Teleology usually involves the assumption that there is some potential in
                      the present which could result in a particular sort of future. But this need
                      not mean that this potential lurks within the present like petals within a
                      bud. It is present rather in the sense that I have a potential to travel up to
                      Glasgow right now, which is hardly some kind of secret structure of my
                      being. Teleology here is just a way of describing where I am in the light of
                      where I could feasibly get to.
                                                               —Terry Eagleton, The Illusions of Postmodernism1
              F     EW words were as reviled in literary criticism and theory of the eight-
                    ies, nineties, and early aughts as “teleology.” It seems strange when
              you remember that teleology—derived from the Greek world t<U+03AD><U+03BB><U+03BF><U+03C2>,
              “end” or “purpose”—simply means interpreting things in relation to
              their possible goal or outcome. It’s hard to imagine reading a novel with-
              out any consideration of its conclusion, or a sonnet without considering
              what its volta seems to do. And, as Eagleton notes, you can’t interpret
              (much less formulate) politics without addressing the question of pur-
              pose, the ends desired as well as the means by which those ends might
              be achieved. In our current moment, as we grapple with the problem
              of climate change and collective action, as we struggle to figure out
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001158

                    906          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    what world we are heading toward, the question of ends has never felt
                    more important.
                            Eagleton is uncannily sensitive here to the importance of teleology in
                    the history of thinking about living systems. Teleological thought was espe-
                    cially important in the long nineteenth century, when generations of writ-
                    ers, scientists, and thinkers struggled to explain just how things like “petals”
                    form out of things like “buds.” Immanuel Kant—writing with an eye
                    toward contemporary science—was enormously important in making pur-
                    pose a central question for natural philosophy and aesthetics. Natural pur-
                    poses, he argued, were impossible to discern, given the uncertainty of
                    natural knowledge, and our uncertainty in a divine author. Yet organisms
                    are defined by the integration of their organic parts—both the way that dif-
                    ferent organs fulfill different functions, and the mutual interdependence
                    of organs and the body. This meant, according to Kant, that the study of
                    living systems required a presumption that specific parts of those systems
                    achieve ends that help the whole. This “purposiveness” governs the study
                    of organic bodies, in Kant’s account, but it also governs works of art, inso-
                    far as they achieve an analogous integration of elements in a larger effect.
                    Extended to the analysis of how societies develop and operate (as G. W. F.
                    Hegel and Karl Marx were quick to do), purposive analysis became a dom-
                    inant mode for thinking about natural, artistic, and social collectives. It was
                    also central to the vocabulary of Victorian criticism, which emphasized the
                    fitness of plot and the aptness of character (putting the “good” in Jesse
                    Rosenthal’s recent study, Good Form).2
                            Kant’s purposive philosophy drew on the long-standing concerns of
                    natural theology, which studied the place of godly design in nature. The
                    nineteenth century, however, witnessed a crisis in the notion of natural
                    design, as materialists like Thomas Henry Huxley worked to expunge
                    questions of purpose from the study of nature. Later histories of the
                    period have generally endorsed Huxley’s argument for how Charles
                    Darwin explained away natural purposes, as figured by adaptations, by
                    describing them as the fruit of chance events. But Darwin’s theory of nat-
                    ural selection in fact required thinking about purpose: in order to imagine
                    the natural history of a given adaptation, one had to guess what that
                    adaptation does, and then explain how that purpose might have devel-
                    oped through gradual changes in specific behaviors or structures.
                            Even as it sidelined divine intervention and design, natural selection
                    required positing what selection selects for—whether the fleetness of the
                    wolf (which helps capture its prey) or the sweetness of the flower’s nectar
                    (which lures pollinating insects), to take two of the earliest examples
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001158

                                                                                                         TE LEO LOGY                907
              given in The Origin of Species. Abandoning the conceit of a divine hand at
              the wheel, and with it, confidence in teleological certainty, only exacer-
              bated the problem of explaining how things came to do what they do.
                      Natural selection fused the question of ends to the methods of nat-
              ural history, and with it, formulated a softer, more flexible notion of pur-
              pose for the study of social and natural systems. This does not mean that
              the program of natural selection was ill-conceived, or hobbled by a cryp-
              tic metaphysical commitment. A soft teleology is central to any study of
              natural or social systems in time. All studies of structure, whether morpho-
              logical or social, raise the problem of purpose; all inquiries into form imply
              questions of function; all questions of transformation foster the study of new
              possibilities. Teleology, understood in Eagleton’s terms as the question of
              “potential in the present” as well as in the past, allows us to imagine
              change and study its ends.
                      Adapted as an open hermeneutic, teleology is about exploring pos-
              sible ends, not faith in a singular outcome. To stress the importance of
              purposive thinking to current scholarship, I might point to the impor-
              tance of “affordance” in Caroline Levine’s formalism, or to the role of
              “anticipation” in Paul Saint-Amour’s recent recounting of trauma theory,
              or to the growing importance of utopia and science fiction as genres of
              climate politics.3 Instead, however, I’d like point to teleology’s signifi-
              cance to the various arguments over reading practices—suspicious vs.
              reparative, depth vs. surface—that have ranged across the critical litera-
              ture of the last two decades. These discussions place extraordinary
              emphasis on the ethical potential of literary analysis, and in doing so,
              examine the purpose of literature and criticism.
                      This turn toward purpose has an inherently teleological flavor
              about it. Beyond its unforgettable reference to Carly Simon, the founda-
              tional discussion for this line of thinking—Eve Sedgwick’s 1997 essay,
              “Paranoid Reading and Reparative Reading; or, You’re So Paranoid,
              You Probably Think This Introduction Is about You”—engrained the
              problem of purpose into the reparative turn. It begins with a discussion
              between Sedgwick and the sociologist Cindy Patton about the conspiracy
              theories that swirled around the AIDS epidemic. Asked whether she
              believed rumors that the disease was a government-engineered plot to
              attack black and gay communities, Patton said it was pointless to study
              the question, as it could only confirm assumptions about the structural
              violence of the modern state. As Patton put it, “What would we know
              then that we don’t already know?”4 This marked a hard teleological
              claim about the purpose of the government, and of AIDS, but also of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001158

                    908          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    knowledge. For Sedgwick, this conversation was a revelation: “I suppose
                    this ought to seem quite an unremarkable epiphany: that knowledge
                    does rather than simply is.”5 Sedgwick’s reorientation enlarges the ques-
                    tion of matters of fact to include matters of concern. In asking not simply
                    whether X is true but also what X would do, Sedgwick exhumed a shared
                    interest in purpose and a consensus belief in the social ends of facts. All
                    research is pursued in the belief that the answer will serve a larger end,
                    and often with an answer in mind. Guesses about both outcome and pur-
                    pose are conditions of investigation.
                            In revisiting this moment, I seek to extend its reparative impulse while
                    elucidating the problematic way it handles purpose. Guesses—whether
                    about politics or about what research will find—shouldn’t determine
                    (even if they often influence) the occasion and outcome of the research
                    itself. To conflate a guess about purpose with certain knowledge is to
                    erase the distinction between soft and hard teleology, between the study
                    of possibilities and the assumption of a singular end. Patton’s answer
                    implied the impossibility of proving the negative: that the government
                    did not engineer the AIDS epidemic, or that this would matter. But I’m
                    assuming that it does matter whether the US government engineered
                    H. I. V. Even as Sedgwick sides against unqualified suspicion, she gives qual-
                    ified endorsement to a suspicious politics that resonates with today’s mani-
                    acally suspicious “post-truth” public sphere. Formally, though to radically
                    different ends, the American right today echoes this skepticism of basic
                    research, with one important difference (among many) being their suspi-
                    cion that this research (say, into climate science) will contradict, rather
                    than confirm, their politics. My key point is that we require a critical but pro-
                    ductive relation to teleology. Rita Felski suggests suspicious reading and
                    detective fiction have one real distinction, that in the former, there’s no
                    real mystery:6 we already know who done it. The paranoid style lives on,
                    and it knows both too much and not enough about outcomes.
                            If the hermeneutics of suspicion operates within a relatively closed tel-
                    eology (the end is presumed), then reparative readings work to open tele-
                    ology, emphasizing the productive possibilities of the critical encounter.
                    All research—not just research in the suspicious mode—is teleological: ori-
                    ented toward ends and purposes. This is one legacy of the nineteenth cen-
                    tury, with its wide-reaching effort to explain social and natural
                    entanglement in the absence of design. Our guesses about purpose and
                    outcome are essential as we try to figure out how we got here, what’s
                    going on, and where this planet might be headed. It wouldn’t be so bad
                    to keep in mind that we are always reading with something in mind. Teleology
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001158

                                                                             TELEOLOGY, TEMPORALITY                                 909
              does not mean we’re caught in a trap; it just means we can’t help thinking
              about the future. Carly Simon still puts it best: We can never know about the
              days to come, but we think about them anyway.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Terry Eagleton, The Illusions of Postmodernism (Oxford: Blackwell
                   Publishers, 1996), 108.
              2. Jesse Rosenthal, Good Form: The Ethical Experience of the Victorian Novel
                   (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017).
              3. Caroline Levine, Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network (Princeton:
                   Princeton University Press, 2015); Paul K. Saint-Amour, Tense Future:
                   Modernism, Total War, Encyclopedic Form (Oxford: Oxford University
                   Press, 2015). Fredric Jameson has famously argued that we are unable
                   to imagine a better world, and that science fiction confronts the
                   impossibility of imagining the future in Archaeologies of the Future: The
                   Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions (New York: Verso, 2005).
                   To this, Kim Stanley Robinson responds, “We can imagine utopia;
                   it’s easy as pie”—it’s imagining how to get there that’s the dilemma
                   —but “we have come to a moment of utopia or catastrophe; there is
                   no middle ground. . . . utopia is no longer a nice idea but, rather, a
                   survival necessity” (“Remarks on Utopia in the Age of Climate
                   Change,” Utopian Studies 27, no. 1 [2016]: 7, 10).
              4. Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, “Paranoid Reading and Reparative Reading,
                   Or, You’re So Paranoid, You Probably Think This Introduction Is
                   about You,” in Novel Gazing: Queer Readings in Fiction (Durham: Duke
                   University Press, 1997), 4.
              5. Sedgwick, “Paranoid Reading,” 4.
              6. Rita Felski, “Suspicious Minds,” Poetics Today 32, no. 2 (2011): 215–34, 225.
              Temporality
              JACOB JEWUSIAK
                        HEN Gerard Manley Hopkins reflects on the “grandeur of God,”
              W         he claims that it “will flame out, like shining from shook foil”
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001158

