                                                                             TELEOLOGY, TEMPORALITY                                 909
              does not mean we’re caught in a trap; it just means we can’t help thinking
              about the future. Carly Simon still puts it best: We can never know about the
              days to come, but we think about them anyway.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Terry Eagleton, The Illusions of Postmodernism (Oxford: Blackwell
                   Publishers, 1996), 108.
              2. Jesse Rosenthal, Good Form: The Ethical Experience of the Victorian Novel
                   (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017).
              3. Caroline Levine, Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network (Princeton:
                   Princeton University Press, 2015); Paul K. Saint-Amour, Tense Future:
                   Modernism, Total War, Encyclopedic Form (Oxford: Oxford University
                   Press, 2015). Fredric Jameson has famously argued that we are unable
                   to imagine a better world, and that science fiction confronts the
                   impossibility of imagining the future in Archaeologies of the Future: The
                   Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions (New York: Verso, 2005).
                   To this, Kim Stanley Robinson responds, “We can imagine utopia;
                   it’s easy as pie”—it’s imagining how to get there that’s the dilemma
                   —but “we have come to a moment of utopia or catastrophe; there is
                   no middle ground. . . . utopia is no longer a nice idea but, rather, a
                   survival necessity” (“Remarks on Utopia in the Age of Climate
                   Change,” Utopian Studies 27, no. 1 [2016]: 7, 10).
              4. Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, “Paranoid Reading and Reparative Reading,
                   Or, You’re So Paranoid, You Probably Think This Introduction Is
                   about You,” in Novel Gazing: Queer Readings in Fiction (Durham: Duke
                   University Press, 1997), 4.
              5. Sedgwick, “Paranoid Reading,” 4.
              6. Rita Felski, “Suspicious Minds,” Poetics Today 32, no. 2 (2011): 215–34, 225.
              Temporality
              JACOB JEWUSIAK
                        HEN Gerard Manley Hopkins reflects on the “grandeur of God,”
              W         he claims that it “will flame out, like shining from shook foil”
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800116X

                    910          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    and gather “to a greatness, like the ooze of oil.”1 These modalities of
                    Godly power exemplify competing temporalities: the flashing, electric
                    moment and a slow, encompassing duration. God’s combination of
                    these temporalities serves as proof of his greatness—a divine simultaneity
                    that brings together times that, for humans, remain epistemologically dis-
                    tinct. The sonnet then presents a bifurcated image of the world: one
                    where generations of humanity have “seared” the soil with trade and
                    another of a resilient nature “never spent.”2 By opposing the world of
                    humanity’s finite scarcity against that of the Holy Ghost’s eternal abun-
                    dance, these lines create an alternative temporal binary. The sonnet
                    entwines these different ways of thinking about time—the moment/dura-
                    tion and the finite/eternal—through the envelope rhyme of its octave
                    and the cross rhyming of its sestet. These configurations of rhyme attest
                    to the poem’s uneven mapping of one system of time onto another. The
                    analysis of duration, for example, not only derives meaning from its
                    opposition to the moment, but also bears the residue of tangential and
                    tendentious ways of thinking about time, such as finitude and infinitude.
                            By drawing together different vectors of time, “God’s Grandeur”
                    reminds the critic of Victorian literature of the temporal complexity
                    that has fallen out of current debates about historicism and formalism.
                    Recently, critics such as John Bowen and Rita Felski have attacked the his-
                    toricist position as edging out the innovation of new critical approaches;
                    Tom Eyers memorably refers to this as the “strangulating hegemony of his-
                    toricism in the literary disciplines.”3 In response to this frustration, some
                    scholars have pushed the pendulum of scholarship to form. Following
                    Caroline Levine’s influential book Forms and Sandra Macpherson’s call
                    to imagine “a genuinely formalist critical practice . . . that would turn
                    one away from history without shame or apology,” a series of recent
                    books in Victorian criticism have featured “form” in their titles.4 In what fol-
                    lows, I argue that the turn away from history to form often privileges spatial
                    arrangements, such as structural patterns (Levine) or description (surface
                    reading), over time’s passage. I propose that renewed engagement with
                    temporality offers polemic opportunities that the debate between histori-
                    cism and formalism obscures.
                            While critics such as Catherine Gallagher and Pearl Brilmyer have
                    recently called for injecting formalism with new temporal possibilities,
                    they stop short of providing concrete models for what this might look
                    like.5 Hopkins’s “God’s Grandeur” provides one possible model by set-
                    ting duration and the moment alongside the finite and the infinite as
                    a way of expanding the dimensions of temporal experience. Drawing
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800116X

                                                                                                     T E M PO R A L I T Y           911
              these systems into new configurations also challenges the temporal com-
              mitments of historicism and formalism. In their strongest expressions,
              the formalist freezes the literary text to reveal timeless structures that
              transcend contextual specificity, while the historicist reads the text as a
              product of the historical contingencies that surround its production.
              Though many critics now work somewhere at the intersection of history
              and form, the terms resonate with a polemic opposition that continues to
              inform scholarly debates.
                      Yet the normalization of this methodological opposition has resulted
              in a critical myopia that privileges spatial concerns over the temporal—in
              arguments that require a firm grounding in space before entering the
              conversation. Many of the most influential pieces in Victorian studies
              focus upon institutional or domestic spaces—such as the prison, the
              workhouse, the factory, or the home—and even studies of time in the
              nineteenth century often examine the way clocks and trains reconfigure
              social spaces. Rather than accuse historicism as narrowing our field and
              positing formalism as the cure, a turn to temporality can open new meth-
              odological coordinates.6 By bracketing the well-worn tracks of historicism
              and formalism, we might clear an opening for new critical positions, a
              richer continuum for polemic based on the interaction—rather than
              opposition—of different time systems.
                      This reparative approach to temporality can help us identify exam-
              ples of marginality that a more spatially oriented polemic might miss.
              How do the characters who do not have a “place” in the Victorian novel’s
              major plots—such as the bildungsroman or the marriage plot—make
              ethical demands on the reader’s attention through the way time shapes
              the narrative? By thinking in a temporal idiom beyond the formalist/his-
              toricist binary, we can attend to mixtures of dilation and compression,
              diuturnity and eventfulness, that the linear narrative of development
              pushes aside in its focus on the singular protagonist. Marginal characters
              do not just compete for limited space, but also inhabit temporal zones
              that intersect, overlay, and parallel the represented world shared in the
              text.7 For example, a temporal context that has received relatively little
              critical attention is aging. The intersection of the biological and cultural
              rhythms of growing older as it occurs in a poem or novel provides a rich
              site for interrogating the politics of representation—of who counts as
              worthy of attention and who does not. Thomas Hardy, in “I Look Into
              My Glass,” reflects on the way time writes itself into his face: the “wasting
              skin” he views in the mirror contrasts with the youthful feeling in his
              heart, and gives rise to a sense of alienation from “hearts grown cold
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800116X

                    912          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    to me.”8 The coming of age creates dissonance on two temporal planes—
                    the poet’s relation to himself, where his appearance does not correspond
                    to his inner feeling, and society, which excludes the poet based on ageist
                    expectations about growing older.
                            While temporalities such as aging tend to be associated with margin-
                    alization, this is not always the case, nor is this the most compelling ave-
                    nue of inquiry. Instead, we should ask how authors used temporality as a
                    way of escaping, critiquing, lamenting, or celebrating the spatial contexts
                    that appear so much more unforgivably solid and inescapably real.
                    Enabling an inventive inquiry about how literature holds together some-
                    times irreconcilable combinations of time involves thinking beyond a
                    reductive opposition of terms like history and form, to the overlooked
                    and undiscovered temporal interstices of a future criticism.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Gerard Manley Hopkins, “God’s Grandeur,” in Poems and Prose
                          (New York: Penguin, 1985), 27, lines 1–3.
                    2. Hopkins, “God’s Grandeur,” lines 6, 9.
                    3. Tom Eyers, “Theory Over Method, or In Defense of Polemic,” Critical
                          Inquiry 44, no. 1 (2017): 136–43, 139. Bowen laments “how deeply (or,
                          rather, how shallowly) historicist most Victorian studies is” (“Time for
                          Victorian Studies?” Journal of Victorian Culture 14, no. 1 [2009]: 282–93,
                          284). In a wider context, Felski urges that “We cannot close our eyes to
                          the historicity of art works, and yet we sorely need alternatives to see-
                          ing them as transcendentally timeless on the one hand and impris-
                          oned in their moment of origin on the other” (The Limits of Critique
                          [Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2015], 154).
                    4. Sandra Macpherson, “A Little Formalism,” ELH 82, no. 2 (2015): 384–
                          405, 385. See recent volumes such as Nathan K. Hensley, Forms of
                          Empire: The Poetics of Victorian Sovereignty (Oxford: Oxford University
                          Press, 2016); Jesse Rosenthal, Good Form: The Ethical Experience of the
                          Victorian Novel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017); Claire
                          Jarvis, Exquisite Masochism: Marriage, Sex, and the Novel Form
                          (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2016).
                    5. Identifying a tendency for criticism to extract the timeless from the
                          momentary, Gallagher calls for “analytic insights into the temporal
                          nature of narrative” that address what is left out of the “partialness
                          and inadequacy of stop-action formal analyses” (“Formalism and
                          Time,” MLQ 61, no. 1 [2000]: 229–51, 251). More recently, Brilmyer
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800116X

                                                                      TE MPORALITY, THEATRICALITY                                   913
                   uses Ruskin to reflect upon the duration of literary form: “Let us imag-
                   ine new ways of accounting for the temporality of both social and lit-
                   erary forms, structures which are neither unchanging outlines nor
                   historical moments entirely past” (“Durations of Presents Past:
                   Ruskin and the Accretive Quality of Time,” Victorian Studies 59, no. 1
                   [2016]: 94–97, 96–97).
              6. Sue Zemka’s Time and the Moment in Victorian Literature and Society
                   (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012) provides a compel-
                   ling example of using temporality as the basis for a larger account
                   of hermeneutics, modernity, and the novel.
              7. Alex Woloch theorizes characters in the novel as “jostl[ing] for limited
                   space within the same fictive universe” (The One vs. The Many: Minor
                   Characters and the Space of the Protagonist in the Novel [Princeton:
                   Princeton University Press, 2003], 13).
              8. Thomas Hardy, “I Look Into My Glass,” in Thomas Hardy: The Complete
                   Poems, ed. James Gibson (London: Palgrave, 2001), 81, lines 2, 6.
              Theatricality
              SHARON ARONOFSKY WELTMAN
              D       URING its first season, the hit television series Glee aired an episode
                       named “Theatricality,” in which the talented glee club kids pay
              homage to Lady Gaga and Kiss.1 They wear homemade versions of the
              stars’ hyperextravagant costumes in their high school’s hallways as well
              as on stage, using their wild (and wildly creative) outfits for defiant self-
              expression, braving harsh reactions from bullies and the school principal.
              Beyond the students’ personal flair, the title draws attention to the epi-
              sode as exuberant performance rather than as a mimetic approximation
              of real life.
                      Because “theatricality” denotes knowingness about the medium’s
              effect, it is also defined negatively: “the quality of being exaggerated
              and excessively dramatic.”2 This is how Thomas Carlyle uses the term
              in its oldest recorded instance (which is Victorian): The French
              Revolution (1837) opposes theatricality to sincerity.3 Here Carlyle displays
              the antitheatricality that Jonas Barish chronicles in The Anti-theatrical
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800116X

