                                                             T H E AT R I CAL I T Y, T R A N S AT L A NT I C I S M                  917
              16. Dickens, Oliver Twist, 118.
              17. Mamie Dickens, My Father as I Recall Him (New York: E. P. Dutton,
                     1900), 49–50.
              18. David Kurnick, Empty Houses: Theatrical Failure and the Novel
                     (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011), 7.
              19. Dickens, Oliver Twist, 118.
              20. Charles Dickens, The Mystery of Edwin Drood (London: Penguin,
                     1974), 43.
              21. Joseph. Mazzinghi, “Ye shepherds tell me: a celebrated glee”
                     (New York: Dubois and Stodart, 1823–1826).
              22. Don Michael Randel, The Harvard Dictionary of Music, ed.
                     (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2003), 353.
              Transatlanticism
              LINDA K. HUGHES
              F     IRST a few words about the collaborative contemplation of this key-
                    word. It emerges most directly from the fact that all five of us are cur-
              rently engaged in editing Transatlantic Anglophone Literatures, 1776–1920,
              scheduled for publication by Edinburgh University Press in 2020. Three
              of us are Americanists, two of us British studies specialists. But I suggest
              that collaboration is not merely a pragmatic result of our working as an
              editorial team; it is intrinsic to transatlanticism itself, a metaprocess, so to
              speak, answering to the interactive intellectual, material, social, and
              cultural forces that bring transatlanticism into being.
                      Transatlanticism extends back in deep time further than we can see,
              to any humans who traveled across the Atlantic in any direction, by any
              means, and touched on shores on the other side.1 But if Victorian-era
              transatlanticism emerged from prior global passages, it underwent, to
              pun deliberately, a sea change in the nineteenth century. Altered
              national relations resulting from revolutions (American, French,
              Haitian), wars, imperial ambitions, economic development and exploita-
              tion on one hand, or reform movements (abolition, expanding citizen
              rights and aspirations) on the other, quickened interchanges between
              nations around the Atlantic basin. New ideas—themselves “forms” in
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001183

                    918          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Caroline Levine’s sense and catalysts of new literary forms—likewise
                    quickened transatlantic interchanges and circulation whether evolution;
                    theories of nation, history, human nature; conceptions of “literature” and
                    text; entropy; counterfactual imagined worlds; indigeneity; models of lib-
                    eration; or sexualities.2 Quickened circulation, of course, was inseparable
                    from emergent technologies: steam-driven propulsion (of steamships,
                    locomotives, presses, manufactures); technologies of vision (microscopes,
                    techniques of replicating visual images in the press or on hoardings and
                    billboards); the telegraph, and development of laboratory instruments
                    that propelled international collaborative or competing research reported
                    in the expanding press. Capitalism was both the bane and boon of transat-
                    lanticism, permitting wealth from selling human beings into slavery, yet
                    generating new opportunities for earning income, whether Frederick
                    Douglass or William Wells Brown lecturing in Ireland and Britain, or
                    Anthony Trollope’s friend Kate Field, the American journalist, reporting
                    from the “old world.” Perhaps most important for transatlanticism was
                    the quickened literacy and purchasing power of increased economic
                    opportunity, without which the mass print transatlantic culture that
                    emerged could never have developed.
                            This massive, interactive dynamism, as well as the multiple sites of trans-
                    atlanticism, motivate my premise that transatlantic studies and collaboration
                    are inseparable. No individual can have a firm grasp of its constituents,
                    including its social and publishing networks—which is another reason
                    why, in addition to our five-member editorial team, we are relying on a twelve-
                    member advisory board to point out what we five might otherwise miss.
                            Fundamentally dynamic and multiply interactive, transatlanticism is
                    also fluid, literally so, in the ocean that holds the concept together. Yet
                    this too is a fiction like every other boundary. Where does the Atlantic
                    Ocean end and the Indian begin? Waves cannot be contained but over-
                    lap. Putting the Atlantic at the center of transatlanticism, however, pro-
                    vides a heuristic focus. It should also remind us that time, space, and
                    water inform its flow and uneven development and transmission. Often
                    challenging, transatlanticism nonetheless inheres in Victorian and
                    American studies.
                    SARAH RUFFING ROBBINS
                    I     have a faculty appointment in American literature, but I’ve never seen
                          myself as (only) an Americanist. If academics are products of training,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001183

                                                                                         T R A N S AT L A NT I C I S M              919
              it’s no wonder I’ve long resisted borders around American literature and
              have cultivated transnational approaches (transatlanticism being just one).
                      Language study going back to secondary school (Latin, for instance,
              being a transnational force from classical through medieval times, and
              beyond; French coming later but having its own border-crossing history)
              set me up to question national frameworks. Studying at UNC with schol-
              ars like Richard Fogle, who worked in both British and American litera-
              tures, and Donald Kennedy, who promoted comparativist medieval
              studies, built on that foundation. Reading Dante in dialogue with
              Augustine—under Aldo Scaglione’s tutelage—further undermined
              national literary traditions. My interdisciplinary doctoral program at
              Michigan years later included courses from mentors like Julie Ellison,
              demonstrating that transatlanticism was central to nineteenth-century
              culture. So, for me, transatlanticism is defined in part as an experience-
              shaped curricular framework—evident in syllabi and program require-
              ments (such as required language study for doctorates)—for far longer
              than is generally acknowledged.
                      I do recognize that disciplinary containers emphasizing the nation
              are persistent forces. When I codirected a three-year National
              Endowment for the Humanities project called “Making American
              Literatures,” for instance, every time we sent our title off to a publisher
              (say, for a conference session or an essay collection), the “s” would get
              deleted by copyeditors. Thus, I embrace configurations like “transatlanti-
              cism,” which conjure up a ready mapping for audiences.
                      These days, transatlanticism is an increasingly formalized scholarly
              field, confirmed in journals, monographs, conferences, and other mark-
              ers also feeding into curricular formations like courses. Through those
              processes, we can identify concepts that organize transatlanticism as a
              productive heuristic, alongside models like “Pacific Rim,” “Hemispheric
              Studies,” or even “Global Literatures.”3
                      All these fields share metaphors, such as currents and networks, and
              all explore activities that capitalize on and sustain cultural exchange—such
              as social movements, pleasurable travel or enforced diasporas. One feature
              distinguishing transatlanticism is, certainly, its particular geographic focus
              and associated communal experiences of ocean-crossing (as seen in Paul
              Gilroy’s “black Atlantic,” Jace Weaver’s “red Atlantic,” and scholarship
              on “green” Irish circuitry).4 Yet, as the field matures, some early tenden-
              cies, such as focusing on English-language texts, are now recalibrating
              transatlanticism to expand its purview and dialogue with other transna-
              tional frameworks. None too soon, perhaps, given the forces now
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001183

                    920          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    reasserting a brutally exclusive brand of nativism that can discourage stu-
                    dents away from the very intellectual pathways that I’ve celebrated from
                    my own learning history.
                    ANDREW TAYLOR
                    T       RANSATLANTIC literary studies has become a prominent, theoret-
                            ically institutionalized discursive practice within Anglophone schol-
                    arship over the last twenty years. Since the so-called “transnational
                    turn,” in which the traditional focus on national literatures as a schema
                    for organizing disciplinary work shifted to a more international frame-
                    work, the focus on expanded geographical and temporal spaces has
                    established a set of archival, textual and conceptual practices that offer
                    often innovative and radical readings of canonical and hitherto
                    neglected texts alike. The transatlantic becomes, in this guise, an arena
                    in which texts, bodies, objects and ideas all circulate in reciprocal, agonis-
                    tic, overlapping, or incursive geometries. By imagining the transatlantic
                    not as a static geographical area, but one in which the collision of mate-
                    rials generates new ways to conceive of that area in all its diversity, it is
                    possible to effect a powerful critique of the ways in which literary study,
                    so often determined by the parameters of the nation state, has worked
                    to enforce a false but seductive politics of exceptionalism or coherence.
                            To practice transatlantic literary criticism is to participate in a form
                    of comparative work, in which the connectedness of the nineteenth-
                    century Atlantic world is acknowledged without at the same time collaps-
                    ing singularity into sameness. If one of the political critiques of globali-
                    zation is that it enforces a cultural homogeneity, the distinctive field of
                    the “transatlantic” recognizes unlikeness and particularity, as these qual-
                    ities are revealed through forms of exchange and travel. The “thinking
                    across” which, etymologically, the prefix “trans-” signifies, excavates
                    embedded critical shibboleths of national priority or temporal progres-
                    sion. Wai Chee Dimock’s powerful assertion of the ways in which texts
                    are linked by multiple chronologies and contexts of reading is just one
                    account that explodes the neat taxonomies of analysis that have struc-
                    tured, and in many ways continue to structure, the shape of our teaching
                    and research.
                            Of course, a too narrowly-conceived focus on the Anglophone (or,
                    worse, British-USA) literary field runs the risk of institutionalizing an
                    alternative dominant paradigm that constricts the kinds of Atlantic
                    “thinking across” that we undertake. The challenge here is for academic
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001183

                                                                                         T R A N S AT L A NT I C I S M              921
              training and scholarship that is multilingual, or at least theoretically
              attuned to translation studies, so that the full rhizomatic potential of cul-
              tural and literary contact can be explored. To read transatlantically, then,
              involves a shuttling back and forth between national, regional and hemi-
              spheric formations, with a sensitivity to the ways in which the literary text
              is differently published, read, reviewed, and understood across space and
              time.
              HEIDI HAKIMI-HOOD
              E      ARLY on in my work, I studied literatures categorized according to
                      specific national affiliations. While quite useful in many respects,
              training in close reading prompted me to see texts as self-enclosed,
              bound by their own borders, thereby leaving me with subtle impressions
              that authors were disconnected from one another. Over time, I shifted
              toward a more comparative, international approach to literary studies,
              and I learned how authors and their works move across geographic and
              cultural borders. Cross-cultural literary scholarship, although not new,
              does permit scholars to defamiliarize traditional perspectives limited by
              cultural, disciplinary, and national constraints.5 Through defamiliariza-
              tion, one focuses less on what makes British literature, for example, cate-
              gorically British and recognizes that literatures, much like nations, are
              constantly in conversation with one another. Defamiliarized readings, in
              turn, lend themselves to transatlanticism, an approach that centers on
              networked, international literary figures and movements that have “always,
              already” been connected to one another.
                      Transatlanticism advances a nuanced perspective for cosmopolitan liter-
              ary studies. As part of an expanding literary tradition, Victorian transatlantic
              scholars highlight instances of cultural exchange among communities repre-
              sented by indigenous-language, Anglophone, Francophone, Hispanophone,
              and Lusophone literatures, among others. Transatlanticism breaks away from
              emphasizing that texts are written by individual authors in the language of
              their particular nationality. Transatlanticism reminds individuals to read
              and research with regard to writers’ cultural, linguistic, and political
              exchanges.
                      By taking a transatlantic view, scholars emphasize the cosmopolitan
              nature of literatures that have emerged from all sides of the Atlantic.
              Transatlanticism recognizes a literary collective—meaning multiple
              authors, literatures, and languages convey local and global issues of sig-
              nificance to a particular community or communities. As an example,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001183

                    922          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    transatlantic scholars identify how nineteenth-century authors cooperate
                    with one another by: 1). Illuminating how their individual literary contri-
                    butions shaped their contemporary cultural moments and 2). Revealing
                    how both local and international histories impacted their writing.
                    Specifically, transatlanticism familiarizes readers with the ways in which
                    Victorian-era authors and their works cooperated with one another
                    through their responses to cultural connections and exchanges moti-
                    vated by events and movements they experienced as contemporaries:
                    abolitionism, scientific advancements, improvements in communication,
                    political tensions, universal suffrage, education for women, wars, illness
                    and migrations, to name a few. Transatlanticism reveals cultural histories
                    that have always been present but have received limited scholarly expo-
                    sure. Not rooted to one culture, transatlanticism emerges from a com-
                    mon issue that transforms multiple cultures at particular points in time.
                    ADAM NEMMERS
                    T       RANSATLANTICISM is a burgeoning interdisciplinary field popu-
                            lated by historians, political scientists and International
                    Relationists, sociologists, and cultural and literary theorists, represented
                    by both professional organizations (such as the TSA [Transatlantic
                    Studies Association] and the Transatlantic Platform), various university-
                    based centers (on the continent of Europe as well as in the US and the
                    UK) and academic journals (such as Symbiosis and The Journal of
                    Transatlantic Studies). The field invites us to abandon the silo of nationalist
                    approaches in favor of a more expansive view of the Atlantic World as an
                    interconnected and contested space.
                            Transatlanticism emphasizes links between Europe, Africa, and the
                    Americas (including the Caribbean), recognizing that before the advent
                    of air and motor transportation, exchange was conducted primarily
                    between maritime nodes, regardless of geographic nationality. Foremost
                    it explores the umbilical relationship between mother countries in
                    Europe and colonies in the Americas, which often took the form of eco-
                    nomic and mercantile exchange (including the notorious trade that
                    brought slaves to the New World) and was also influential in the arena
                    of culture, with ideas transmitted through art, literature, and music.
                    The field reminds us that despite the dominant narrative of westward
                    transmission (as in the case of early American dependence upon
                    British novels and periodicals), traffic was inherently a mutual exchange,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001183

                                                                                         T R A N S AT L A NT I C I S M              923
              with goods, people, and culture flowing back to Europe, sometimes trian-
              gulated with Australia, the Middle East, and Asia.
                      Viewing the Atlantic World through a transatlantic lens opens up
              horizontal, rather than vertical, space for exploration. It invites us to con-
              sider the world in bilateral terms, not only with regards to
              Anglo-American exchange, but also Franco- , Luso- , and Hispanic-,
              among others. Transatlanticism shifts critics’ focus from nationality to
              internationality—recognizing the shifting boundaries and borders of
              nations themselves as well as the liminal no-man’s-land that was the
              high seas. In a way this is not a new worldview, but a return to the way
              the Atlantic was viewed during the era of Empire, when every adjoining
              territory was at contest and markers of nationhood were mercurial.
              Especially given the fluidity of geopolitical relations, including the
              push/pull between nationalism and cosmopolitan forces, the field of
              transatlanticism encourages a multilateral perspective of great contempo-
              rary value. We would do well to abandon the often isolationist approaches
              of standalone disciplines for a more expansive consideration of the
              Atlantic World, both past and present.
                                                        SPEAKING COLLABORATIVELY
              All the statements above were written individually, honoring the “singu-
              larity” as well as multiplicity of our voices. Linda K. Hughes emphasizes
              print culture and historicizes nineteenth-century transatlanticism.
              While working from within the globalism of American transatlantic stud-
              ies, Sarah Ruffing Robbins approaches transatlanticism through her
              learning story (as does Heidi Hakimi-Hood in part). Andrew Taylor the-
              orizes the field and, as a leading scholar long closely associated with the
              transatlantic studies series at Edinburgh University Press, takes a broad
              outlook on the field as it is practiced today. Heidi Hakimi-Hood, from
              a British studies perspective, and Adam Nemmers from an Americanist
              point of departure, emphasize the internationalism of transatlantic stud-
              ies and the need to proceed in full awareness of the multiple languages
              of transatlanticism, thus resisting Anglophone linguistic imperialism. Our
              divergences remind us that transatlanticism as an academic study
              emerges from the many voices interacting transatlantically and the
              diverse scholarly approaches to transatlanticism today, as well as our
              ongoing conversations among ourselves and with board members.
                      We are writing our conclusion collaboratively, however. Adopting
              the comparative method so essential to transatlanticism itself, we can
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001183

                    924          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    see points of connection within our statements, including the very impor-
                    tance of comparative methods, the inherent unevenness and instability of
                    borders, transatlanticism’s multilingualism, and its indebtedness to Wai
                    Chee Dimock’s notion of deep time.
                            By now transatlanticism is a well-established rather than nascent
                    field, and perhaps its major challenge is to resist ossifying its parameters
                    or methods, to remain alive to what exists just out of view amidst the com-
                    peting hemispheres that comprise transatlanticism. To thrive, transatlan-
                    ticism as a field of academic study must remain open to the new, whether
                    new frameworks, hybridities, or voices previously unrecalled.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Wai Chee Dimock, “Deep Time: American Literature and World
                          History,” American Literary History, 13, no. 4 (2001): 755–75.
                    2. Caroline Levine, Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network (Princeton:
                          Princeton University Press, 2015), 1–23.
                    3. See Noella Brada-William and Karen Chow, eds., Crossing Oceans:
                          Reconfiguring American Literary Studies in the Pacific Rim (Hong Kong:
                          Hong Kong University Press, 2004); Caroline F. Levander and
                          Richard Levine, eds., Hemispheric American Studies (New Brunswick:
                          Rutgers University Press, 2008); Shelley Fisher Fishkin, “Unsettling
                          American Literature, Rethinking Nation and Empire,” in The
                          Cambridge Companion to Transnational American Literature, ed. Yogita
                          Goyal (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017), 19–36; and
                          Wai Chee Dimock, Through Other Continents: American Literature Across
                          Deep Time (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008).
                    4. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness
                          (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993); Jace Weaver, The Red
                          Atlantic: American Indigenes and the Making of the Modern World, 1000–
                          1927 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2014); and
                          Peter D. O’Neill and David Lloyd, eds., The Black and Green Atlantic:
                          Cross-Currents of the African and Irish Diasporas (Basingstoke: Palgrave
                          Macmillan, 2009).
                    5. See Amanda Claybaugh, “Toward a New Transatlanticism: Dickens in
                          the United States,” Victorian Studies 48, no. 3 (2006): 439–60.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001183

