                                                                                                            VISUALITY               937
              10. Shelly Jarenski, Immersive Words: Mass Media, Visuality, and American
                     Literature, 1839–1893 (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press,
                     2015) and Marit Grøtta, Baudelaire’s Media Aesthetics: The Gaze of the
                     Flâneur and Nineteenth-Century Media (London: Bloomsbury, 2015).
              Visuality
              RACHEL TEUKOLSKY
              I   F vision was the master-sense of the nineteenth century, then scholars
                   today have worked to critique that hegemony. Following Michel
              Foucault, they have shown how items of Victorian visual culture chan-
              neled the power of science, medicine, or the State in enforcing social
              norms. The mug shot, the colonial archive, the eugenic visual experi-
              ment, the photographed hysteric: all of these served to document and
              regulate what Foucault calls the “anatomo-politics of the human body.”1
                      The twentieth-century hostility to the visual sense for its associations
              with domination and control has something in common with nineteenth-
              century texts that challenged the deceptive quality of appearances in
              favor of inner truths.2 As Kate Flint notes, even while Victorian fiction lav-
              ishly recreated “the visible details of a crowded material world,” that
              vision was constantly being contested by fiction that “encouraged readers
              to think, critically and skeptically, about the category of the visual itself.”3
              This skepticism expressed itself in “a refusal to be satisfied with the rep-
              resentation of surfaces.”4 Jane Eyre exemplifies just this kind of suspicion,
              as it proposes a moral gaze that sees through deceitful, alluring surfaces.
              When the young Mr. Rochester meets Bertha Mason for the first time, he
              is ensnared by the mirage of her beauty, as she is shown off to him by
              scheming family members. Only after their marriage will he learn the ter-
              rifying truth about her character. By contrast, “plain Jane” possesses no
              external beauty; her attractions emanate from within. Victorian novels
              often teach us to disbelieve illusionistic or attractive surfaces, encourag-
              ing us to seek deeper meaning beyond the visible.
                      Writers and thinkers from the nineteenth century onward can there-
              fore be seen as united in accusing the visual sense of immorality, critiqu-
              ing its intrinsic superficiality and reductiveness, its adherence to mere
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001237

                    938          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    externals, its offer of a quick path to unjust conclusions about identity
                    and otherness.
                            For the remainder of this short essay, however, I would like to pro-
                    pose a counterdiscourse of Victorian visuality, one that dwells in the per-
                    verse surface. For even while a novel like Jane Eyre asserts the deep self in
                    truths beyond superficial beauty, the novel also burns with the desire of
                    the eyes, glorying in visual pleasure and intense visual sensation as a form
                    of self-authorization and self-assertion.
                            Foucault’s model of vision invokes qualities of reason, control, and
                    categorization—elements emerging from the Enlightenment, when phi-
                    losophers fused seeing and knowing into a singular idea.5 A Descartian
                    account linked the mind’s eye and the eye’s mind, making vision into
                    an eminently logical operation, one of abstraction and objectification.
                    Jonathan Crary labels this model as “classical vision,” epitomized by the
                    camera obscura and an empiricist idea that “observation leads to truthful
                    inferences about the world.”6
                            In Jane Eyre, however, the gaze of power is displaced by the gaze of
                    the governess.7 Unlike Foucault’s panopticon, a model of powerful vision
                    from above, the novel offers a polymorphous visuality from below, or at
                    eyelevel. Crary describes nineteenth-century “postclassical” vision as
                    sited in the body, operating through flawed, corporeal eyeballs. Crary
                    studies Goethe’s experiments on his own eyes, as the German philoso-
                    pher noted weird illusory flecks, colors, and afterimages swimming across
                    his visual field. The embodied, postclassical model of vision seems espe-
                    cially apt for a novel like Jane Eyre, defined by its extreme physicality. With
                    characters subject to hunger, sickness, fainting, fits, burning, biting, stab-
                    bing, flogging, freezing, or dying, visuality takes its place in this milieu as
                    a deeply enfleshed and organic process. Approaching the novel from this
                    angle might prompt us to ask what Jane Eyre has in common with the
                    paintings of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, as both offer scorching visions of
                    proximate, desired bodies.8
                            The countervisuality of Jane Eyre helps us to understand some of the
                    novel’s contradictions. In one repeated pattern, Jane critiques hypocrites,
                    or those who judge by surface appearances, even while she invests surface
                    visions and physical sensations with a deep affective intensity. Hence her
                    obsessive attention to character appearances and physiognomies, from
                    John Reed’s “dingy and unwholesome skin,” to Miss Temple’s “fine pen-
                    ciling of long lashes” around her eyes, to St. John Rivers’s “lofty forehead,
                    still and pale as a white stone.”9 Jane’s powerful emotions are rendered
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001237

                                                                                                            VISUALITY               939
              according to a wild and rampant visuality. While Rochester banters with
              female guests in his drawing room, Jane looks at him hungrily:
                      [M]y eyes were drawn involuntarily to his face; I could not keep their lids
                      under control: they would rise, and the irids would fix on him. I looked,
                      and had an acute pleasure in looking,—a precious yet poignant pleasure;
                      pure gold, with a steely point of agony: a pleasure like what the thirst-
                      perishing man might feel who knows the well to which he has crept is poi-
                      soned, yet stoops and drinks divine draughts nevertheless.
               She feels her eyeballs as organs in her own body, with eyelids, irises, all
              irresistibly drawn to the spectacular desired body. Her forbidden vision
              feels like an irrational, driving thirst. Rochester’s features, meanwhile—
              the “massive brow,” “jetty eyebrows, deep eyes”—all produce “an influ-
              ence that quite mastered me.” The eye of the governess transgresses
              class divides and respectable modesty, losing itself in the mad pleasure
              imparted by the sight of the beloved’s face.
                      While this example inscribes Jane Eyre within a familiar narrative of
              heterosexual desire, another, perhaps even more crucial moment dis-
              lodges our sense of vision’s heteronormative role in the novel. I return
              to an episode in the Lowood school, to a formative moment in Jane’s
              childhood, and an exemplary illustration of the novel’s intensely physical-
              ized visual experience. The tyrant Mr. Brocklehurst has instructed the
              entire school to direct its gaze upon Jane, whom he will denounce as a
              liar: “I felt their eyes directed like burning-glasses against my scorched
              skin.” In punishment, Jane is hoisted upon a stool and “exposed to gene-
              ral view on a pedestal of infamy.” The school’s shame-inducing gaze ren-
              ders itself like a flame scorching Jane’s skin. Yet her agony upon the stool
              is mitigated by the solidarity offered by her fellow schoolgirls, in a passage
              that plays out as an interweaving of gazes, feelings, sensations, and pas-
              sionate visual metaphors:
                      What my sensations were no language can describe; but just as they all rose,
                      stifling my breath and constricting my throat, a girl came up and passed me:
                      in passing, she lifted her eyes. What a strange light inspired them! What an
                      extraordinary sensation that ray sent through me! How the new feeling bore
                      me up! It was as if a martyr, a hero, had passed a slave or victim, and
                      imparted strength in the transit. I mastered the rising hysteria, lifted up
                      my head, and took a firm stand on the stool. Helen Burns asked some slight
                      question about her work of Miss Smith, was chidden for the triviality of the
                      inquiry, returned to her place, and smiled at me as she again went by. What a
                      smile! I remember it now, and I know that it was the effluence of fine intel-
                      lect, of true courage; it lit up her marked lineaments, her thin face, her
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001237

                    940          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                             sunken grey eye, like a reflection from the aspect of an angel. Yet at that
                             moment Helen Burns wore on her arm “the untidy badge;” scarcely an
                             hour ago I had heard her condemned by Miss Scatcherd to a dinner of
                             bread and water on the morrow because she had blotted an exercise in copy-
                             ing it out. Such is the imperfect nature of man! such spots are there on the
                             disc of the clearest planet; and eyes like Miss Scatcherd’s can only see those
                             minute defects, and are blind to the full brightness of the orb.
                     Again, the passage warns against judging by external appearances—in this
                    case, the “untidy badge” on Helen’s arm, the blots in her copybook, her
                    sunken grey eye, all like spots on a planet’s surface. But the countering
                    claims for value are also rendered visually, with an intensely physical
                    exchange of glances. The “strange light” of a girl’s eyes produces an
                    “extraordinary sensation” in Jane’s body. The passage renders feelings
                    of solidarity in suffering through a deeply physicalized visuality. Helen’s
                    angelic, beatific nature is compared to a glowing planet with spots, but
                    the metaphor doesn’t quite stay metaphorical: Jane’s body registers the
                    thrill of mutual sightlines as emanations from brilliant visual surfaces.
                    We can read here a queer intensity of exchanged female gazes, mixing
                    desire with the politics of solidarity and insurrection. I would even
                    point to a kind of material Christianity, a heavenly goodness immanent
                    in bodies and gazes, which counters our usual sense of Christian visuality
                    as one of exegetical looking-through, dividing spirit from body.
                            Jane Eyre’s intense affect surrounding the act of looking might
                    prompt a return to some of the book’s more familiar visual tropes—for
                    example, its relentless ekphrasis, in Jane’s hallucinatory drawings, or in
                    the picture-books she reads as a child. Rather than understanding
                    these items merely as symbolic icons to be decoded, we might also see
                    them as contributing to the novel’s physicalized visuality, registering
                    according to their own vivid materiality. That Jane’s drawings come
                    from her imagination, rather than “from life,” seems newly important,
                    since they give substance to the ephemeral workings of her mind, con-
                    cretizing thought as the suggestive lineaments of an image, to be seen
                    and questioned by the curious eyes of others. The racist spectacle of
                    Bertha’s purple face emblematizes the power of bodily seeing and feel-
                    ing, not repressed, but written on the body’s surface. In Jane Eyre’s obses-
                    sive looking-at, looking-upon, looking-through, the novel offers a moral
                    lesson about deceptive surfaces, but perhaps more insistently, it depicts
                    the entwining of visual experience with strong feelings, either repulsive,
                    or, more often, pleasurable, making vision into a self-creating act whose
                    moral payoff is not quite as evident.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001237

                                                                                                            VISUALITY               941
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality, volume I: An Introduction, trans.
                   Robert Hurley (New York: Pantheon Books, 1978), 139. See, among
                   others, Nancy Armstrong, Fiction in the Age of Photography: The Legacy
                   of British Realism (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000);
                   Jennifer Green-Lewis, Framing the Victorians: Photography and the
                   Culture of Realism (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996); and
                   Daniel A. Novak, Realism, Photography, and Nineteenth-Century Fiction
                   (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008). Kate Flint offers a
                   definitive account of Victorian visuality in The Victorians and the
                   Visual Imagination (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
              2. Martin Jay traces French theory’s hostility to visuality in Downcast Eyes:
                   The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-Century French Thought (Berkeley:
                   University of California Press, 1993).
              3. Kate Flint, “‘Seeing is believing?’: Visuality and Victorian Fiction,” in A
                   Concise Companion to the Victorian Novel, ed. Francis O’Gorman
                   (Malden: Blackwell, 2005), 37, 43.
              4. Flint, “‘Seeing is believing?,’” 37.
              5. See Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans.
                   Alan Sheridan (1977; rpt., New York: Vintage Books, 1995).
              6. Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the
                   Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990), 29.
              7. Peter J. Bellis takes a more traditional approach in arguing that Jane
                   Eyre dramatizes a “conflict between two different modes of vision: a
                   penetrating male gaze that fixes and defines the woman as its object,
                   and a marginal female perception that would conceal or withhold
                   itself from the male” (639). See Peter J. Bellis, “In the Window-Seat:
                   Vision and Power in Jane Eyre,” English Literary History 54, no. 3
                   (1987): 639–42.
              8. Dennis Denisoff, in Sexual Visuality From Literature To Film 1850–1950
                   (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), argues that late-Victorian lit-
                   erary works destabilized sex and gender norms through moments of
                   queer or sexualized visuality, especially via literary portraits of artists.
              9. All quotations are taken from Charlotte Brontë, Jane Eyre (1847;
                   Project Gutenberg online edition, 2007).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001237

