                                                                                                            VISUALITY               931
              Visuality
              KATE FLINT
              W         E all see differently. The properties of eyes vary from one person to
                        another—and the messages that are transmitted from the retina to
              the brain shift accordingly. Some of us are shortsighted; some longsighted;
              some colorblind. We may spend a long time contemplating a painting or a
              landscape; flick rapidly through many images on a screen. Our eyes change
              as we age. We use a range of optical prostheses to aid us—spectacles, micro-
              scopes, telescopes. Seeing, however, is not just an ocular process. It involves
              interpretation: interpretation that is dependent upon our personal experi-
              ences, our social positioning, our inherent biases, and the language available
              to us when it comes to translating what we register visually into words.
              Different visual and verbal protocols accompany this assessment, depending
              on whether we are observing Royal Academy paintings, or family photo-
              graphs, or postage stamps; trying to decipher cartoons and visual humor;
              scrutinizing faces, clouds, or skin color; reading diagrams or graphs. Nor
              does the eye work alone, but in combination with the senses of touch and
              smell and taste. Furthermore, we may be acutely aware of being the object
              of scrutiny as well as the person who does the looking. To look, in other
              words, is, to a greater or lesser degree, to exercise power—yet except in excep-
              tional circumstances, the looked-upon individual has the ability to look back,
              and to reverse these dynamics, or, at the very least, to see things from another
              perspective. That last phrase reminds one, of course, how readily the
              language of sight slides from the literal to the metaphoric.
                      All of these variables may be herded together under the term
              “visuality.” This noun, I maintain, does not easily lend itself to a clear
              definition—“visuality is . . . ” Rather, it is best seen as an abstract word, a
              portmanteau word, housing the physiological and neurobiological prac-
              tices of seeing; optical technologies that permit us to observe in greater
              detail, or to record and transmit what we see; and the discourse, cultural
              habits and practices of viewing that allow us to understand what we see.
              Under that overarching rubric of “visuality,” we should also add in the his-
              torically constituted place-and-culture-dependent skill sets that are brought
              to the act of looking—what Michael Baxandall, in Painting and Experience in
              Fifteenth-Century Italy (1972), influentially termed the “period eye.”1 How
              people in the past saw; what conditioned their interpretation of what
              they saw; what mediated what they saw—such questions are not limited
              to historians of art and visual culture, but exercise us all.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001213

                    932          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                            So, what might we think of as being particularly important to
                    Victorian visuality—at once a complicated term, implying aesthetic pro-
                    duction and protocols for seeing over some seven decades, and our
                    own modes of contact with the thick remnants of the Victorian visual
                    world? I’d isolate four things. First, the broadening opportunities to
                    see constructed images: a result of the growth in mechanical reproduc-
                    tion (photographs, engravings, halftone reproductions, as seen in peri-
                    odicals, books, posters), of civic engagement (museums, art galleries,
                    public statues and memorials, stained glass and murals, exhibitions of
                    fine arts, industry, and design), and of commercial and consumerist activ-
                    ity (shop windows, fashion, advertisements). Such images broadened
                    Victorian visual knowledge on a global scale. Second, a preoccupation
                    (especially among the middle classes) with new optical technologies.
                    These provoked self-consciousness about vision’s variability and about
                    the slippage between illusion and reality: I’d include here stereoscopes,
                    cinematic forerunners like the zoetrope and the praxinoscope (and of
                    course early film itself), magic lantern shows, and elaborate theatrical
                    transformations. Thirdly, the rise in popular aesthetics, and how the
                    ideas of, above all, John Ruskin, and then William Morris and other
                    Arts and Crafts theorists fed into the appearance of the ordinary lived
                    environment, from domestic interiors to railway stations. Finally, the com-
                    mitment of these particular writers to the aesthetics of the natural world
                    joined with that of scientific popularizers and naturalists to encourage
                    more attentive environmental observation, whether of plants or beetles,
                    gardens or mountains, or the daily sky.
                            Everything said so far is predicated on the assumption that there is
                    some material object or set of objects to be looked at. I’ve deliberately
                    left until last one further aspect of visuality—its engagement with the
                    physiologically invisible. I’m here not so much thinking about that
                    which is in darkness, in shadow, or underground, or the processes of rev-
                    elation and illumination, achieved through such artificial means as elec-
                    tric lighting of streets and homes. Yet, the connection of visuality with
                    that which is invisible to the seeing eye is the sense in which the word
                    was initially coined, seemingly by Thomas Carlyle, in On Heroes and
                    Hero-Worship (1841) to describe the structural and imaginative achieve-
                    ment of Dante’s Divine Comedy—“every compartment of it is worked
                    out, with intense earnestness, into truth, into clear visuality.”2 Carlyle’s
                    usage suggests that we visualize things as we read of them or hear of
                    them—in our mind’s eye. Mid-Victorian physiological commentators,
                    including Alexander Bain and George Henry Lewes, were fascinated
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001213

                                                                                                            VISUALITY               933
              by our capacity to make mental pictures, both consciously and—a topic of
              wide and perennial interest—in dreams. The 1863 translation of Emanuel
              Swedenborg’s Arcana Cœlestia (1749–56) further pushes the claims of inter-
              nal vision by writing of “the visuality of the internal man, which sees from
              the light of heaven.”3 The importance of imaginative visualization is insep-
              arable from the penning and reading of literary texts.
                      One consequence of the fact that the term “visuality” was not widely
              employed by the Victorians—although Carlyle himself repeated it in var-
              ious contexts—is that using it can seem like imposing a much more
              recent set of theoretical assumptions. Yet it’s important to realize that
              all the components that we now cluster under the rubric of “visuality”
              were, indeed, not just present to the Victorians, but were endlessly dis-
              cussed by them in terms that have become formative to the questions
              we ask of the Victorian period today, and as we reconstruct, so far as
              we can, how the Victorians may have seen their world.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Michael Baxandall, Painting and Experience in Fifteenth-Century Italy. A
                   Primer in the Social History of Pictorial Style, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford
                   University Press, 1988), 29.
              2. Thomas Carlye, “The Hero as Poet,” in On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and
                   The Heroic in History. Six Lectures, 2nd ed. (London: Chapman and
                   Hall, 1842), 144.
              3. Emanuel Swedenborg, Arcana Cœlestia. The Heavenly Mysteries contained
                   in the Holy Scripture, or Word of the Lord, Unfolded, 12 vols. (London: The
                   Swedenborg Society, 1863), 7: 94.
              Visuality
              JONATHAN POTTER
              S     URVEYING work on Victorian visual culture for this journal twenty
                     years ago, Kevin Z. Moore suggested: “there was no coherent politics
              of vision in the nineteenth century; there was only an explosion of visual
              devices and their uses by whoever had the wherewithal to put them to
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001213

