                                                                                                                 AFF ECT            563
              Affect
              ELISHA COHN
              “A          FFECT ” gives us a way to talk about a description of the sound of
                          bluebells agitating one another on a heath; to evoke a barely reg-
              istered discomfiture in a marriage plot, the consequences of which won’t
              emerge for several hundred pages; or, to explain why certain oddball
              literary characters don’t quite feel like people. Critics use the term,
              broadly, to mark a minimal subjectivity that evades standard procedures
              for knowing the self and the social. Fugitive and impersonal, affective
              states are said to circulate outside of the individual, irreducible to the
              more conceptual thoughts or even emotions an individual might have
              about them. Neither active nor passive, they preclude a unitary vision
              of the self-willing subject, and instead point to the subtle processes by
              which the self is an “intimate public” absorbing what is outside it.1
              Therefore, the term is also metacritical: it offers a way to acknowledge
              a critical culture that overvalues exemplary individual acts of producing
              what counts as disciplinary knowledge, and to analyze the shifts in critical
              atmosphere that occur collectively, including the significant one brought
              about by affectively-oriented criticism itself.
                      Atmosphere and mood might be the most flexible and significant
              affective terms right now. Rita Felski, building on Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick’s
              groundbreaking Touching Feeling, notes that critics are newly receptive to
              “delving into the eddies and flows of affective engagement, trying to capture
              something of the quality and the sheer intensity of attachments and orienta-
              tions rather than rushing to explain them, judge them, or wish them away”;
              her recent The Limits of Critique attempts to steer critical mood away from a
              dominant, corrosive suspiciousness.2 As Felski’s recent respondents in
              PMLA have established, such “delving” cannot constitute the full work of lit-
              erary criticism; the V21 Manifesto, moreover, approaches the question of
              critical mood from the opposite standpoint—suspicion is absent, whereas
              the “primary affective mode” of Victorian studies is said to be “the amused
              chuckle.”3 Whether we recognize either, both, or neither characterizations
              of the field’s mood, it seems ineluctable that in our shared spaces, whether
              live, paper, or electronic, some shift has undoubtedly taken place, even just
              insofar as mood has become a prominent term for metacritique. Mood is
              said—like affect more generally—to lack a telos; Jonathan Flatley defines it
              as an atmospheric precondition “in which intentions are formed, projects
              pursued, and particular affects can attach to particular objects.”4 The term
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000244

                    564          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    thus provides a way of thinking about the many scales of our critical project. It
                    points to broad questions of the overall, sometimes far from conscious, tenor
                    of academic discourse. Perhaps more importantly, it captures the work of
                    reading in the classroom and beyond—the textures of a local, close reading,
                    professional or not, alone or in a group, once or many times over many years.
                            What we do with “mood” points to the value as well as limitations of
                    “affect” more generally. Affect theory offers an especially provocative crit-
                    ical vocabulary and approach for Victorian studies because it offers an alter-
                    native to painting the Victorians as constitutively anxious and self-willed, or
                    ourselves as suspicious, bemused, or somehow both. Yet it is attended by
                    two significant questions, recently posed with particular force: to what
                    extent affect theory needs to rely on the findings of experimental science;
                    and, whether its politics are necessarily progressive or even radical. If affect
                    is “a process that is social in origin but biological and physical in effect,”
                    according to Teresa Brennan, some theorists substantiate the distinction
                    between affect and emotion by appeals to clinical studies.5 Ruth Leys, how-
                    ever, has devastated these scientific claims by carefully taking apart the
                    implications of studies and paradigms frequently cited by humanists, espe-
                    cially the line on affect derived not from Benedict Spinoza, Alfred North
                    Whitehead, and Gilles Deleuze, but the more partitioned accounts of feel-
                    ing that come from Sylvan Tompkins, Paul Ekman, and Antonio Damasio.
                    Moreover, affect theory’s alliance with the non-conceptual (despite its
                    affiliation with these more structured theories) tends to elicit utopian state-
                    ments about the immanent possibility of political transformation.6 For
                    instance, Melissa Gregg and Gregory Seigworth, introducing the Affect
                    Theory Reader, recommend “casting a line along the hopeful (though also
                    fearful) cusp of an emergent futurity, casting its lot with the infinitely con-
                    nectable, impersonal, and contagious belongings to this world.”7 But
                    with Steven Goldsmith, I would ask why there is any reason to believe
                    that “critical emotion is the precondition of a future agency to come,” espe-
                    cially if, pace Leys, that feeling is imagined as utterly anti-conceptual and
                    anti-intentional: the belief in affect’s transformative power might merely
                    invert hierarchies of value, privileging affect over reason, in order to
                    redeem feelings often coded as far from positive (pain, self-loss, slow vio-
                    lence).8 A kindred disenchantment of affect’s politics appears in
                    Amanda Anderson’s account of the Kleinian psychoanalytic framework
                    underpinning Sedgwick’s work. For Anderson, this account, based upon
                    extra-literary claims about mind, suggests a fundamental investment in
                    psychic conflict that remains continuous with the relatively more cynical
                    politics of the hermeneutics of suspicion.9
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000244

                                                                                                                 AFF ECT            565
                      These critiques must be taken seriously. Still, it does not make sense to
              view them as entirely foreclosing affectively oriented methods, nor does it fully
              explain why we might want a vocabulary for talking about non-intentionality
              or non-conceptuality, as slippery as the idea of a non-conceptual concept
              might be. A not-particularly-politicized concept of affect has been excep-
              tionally productive for scholars of Victorian literature, notably Rachel
              Ablow, Jesse Oak Taylor, and Benjamin Morgan, whose recent monographs
              concern the intersection of aesthetic forms with scientific concepts—pain,
              atmosphere, physiology—that put pressure on the culturally enshrined
              but newly problematized concept of consciousness in the nineteenth cen-
              tury. Ablow, for instance, attends to affect theory’s optimism historically,
              arguing that Charles Darwin’s account of both pain and emotion “demand
              an affective registration that is discomfiting at least in part because of its
              incompatibility with concrete ameliorative intervention.”10 Given many
              Victorians’ interest in theorizing the physical basis of mind both scientifi-
              cally and in the arts themselves, it makes sense to see Victorian literature
              as theorizing what recognizably looks like affect’s precursor. Particularly
              so because they were sometimes explicitly working in a recuperated
              Spinozist vein or in response to Darwin’s account of emotion’s evolution
              (both part of affect’s dual genealogy). A historicized version of affect is
              more compelling than a purely theoretical one, perhaps, because these crit-
              ics have at most a weak investment in affirming Victorian approaches to
              body-mind through the lens of our own currents in neuroscience. But
              given the emphasis in recent affect theory on affect’s fugitive dimensions,
              it becomes more than a tool of intellectual history’s documentation of
              changing approaches to thinking about how the self is constituted by, and
              shot through, with non-self. It also offers a way to consider how literary
              style and form register these shifting beliefs in terms that somewhat diverge
              from what Caroline Levine, in her major Forms, identifies as structures that
              forge social intelligibility, both like but also unlike the way mood is supposed
              to subtend intellection. “Atmosphere” and “tone”—which have little role to
              play in Levine’s account—are formal terms that evoke a negative or inscru-
              table relation to the social structures that emerge from form in her sense.11
              And while they depend upon subtle formal features that benefit from the
              application of a technical literary critical vocabulary, they are perceptible
              and influential for many kinds of readers and readings. Affect, then,
              seems likely to continue to be productive as a way of thinking about how
              form, and various approaches to formal analysis, work.
                      Moreover, the fact that so much theoretical work oriented toward affect
              (for, against, or somewhere in between) comes from critics whose careers
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000244

                    566          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    began with Victorian literature (Sedgwick, Felski, Anderson, Isobel
                    Armstrong) is instructive, suggesting that Victorian literature has something
                    distinctive to teach us about the relation between feeling and concept.
                    Although Victorian novels and poems are filled with the phenomenological
                    intensities and social contagions affect theory evokes, they also—according
                    to Anderson and Armstrong—tend to feature a doubled, far more analytical
                    and diagnostic project very much associated with, and directly related to,
                    “criticism’s” projects of “explaining” and “judging.”12 How we position our-
                    selves in relation to the knowledge we make is a major question of so many
                    Victorian novels and poems. It’s affect’s question too.
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. Lauren Berlant, The Queen of America Goes to Washington City: Essays on
                            Sex and Citizenship (Durham: Duke University Press, 1997), 4.
                       2. Rita Felski, The Uses of Literature (London: Blackwell, 2009), 19.
                       3. “Manifesto of the V21 Collective,” V21 Collective, http://v21collec-
                            tive.org/manifesto-of-the-v21-collective-ten-theses/                                                (accessed
                            December 28, 2017). Amanda Anderson notes the odd absence of
                            the hermeneutics of suspicion in the V21 Manifesto, which offers an
                            almost entirely contrasting image of collective critical mood from
                            Felski’s, though in a sense it might not have been possible without
                            the attention to mood Sedgwick initiated and Felski elaborated
                            (“Therapeutic Criticism,” NOVEL: A Forum on Fiction 50, no. 3 (2017):
                            321–28, 321). In PMLA’s March 2017 forum on Felski’s The Limits of
                            Critique (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015), see especially
                            Diana Fuss, “But What About Love?” PMLA 132, no. 2 (2017): 352–55.
                       4. Jonathan Flatley, Affective Mapping: Melancholia and the Politics of
                            Modernism (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2008), 19.
                       5. Teresa Brennan, The Transmission of Affect (Ithaca: Cornell University
                            Press, 2004), 3.
                       6. See Ruth Leys, The Ascent of Affect: Genealogy and Critique (Chicago:
                            University of Chicago Press, 2017), especially 18.
                       7. Melissa Gregg and Gregory J. Seigworth, “An Inventory of
                            Shimmers,” in The Affect Theory Reader, ed. Gregg and Seigworth
                            (Durham: Duke University Press, 2010), 4 (emphasis original).
                       8. Steven Goldsmith, Blake’s Agitation: Criticism and the Emotions
                            (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013), 310. As Sianne
                            Ngai and Lauren Berlant suggest, the reconfiguration of agency by
                            affective shifts can serve to diagnose the social situations that engender
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000244

                                                                                    A F F E C T, AN AC HRO N I S M                  567
                     affects without offering transformative potential. See Ngai, Ugly Feelings
                     (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2005); and Berlant. Even for
                     Kathleen Stewart, who evokes with great nuance an “ordinary affect”
                     that constitutes “a surging, a rubbing, a connection of some kind”
                     that makes “the world . . . still tentative, charged, overwhelming, and
                     alive,” nonetheless, “this is not a good thing or a bad thing”
                     (Ordinary Affects [Durham: Duke University Press, 2007], 128).
                9.   See Anderson, “Therapeutic Criticism,” 323.
              10.    Rachel Ablow, Victorian Pain (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
                     2017), 116. See also Benjamin Morgan, The Outward Mind: Materialist
                     Aesthetics in Victorian Science and Literature (Chicago: University of
                     Chicago Press, 2017); and Jesse Oak Taylor, The Sky of Our
                     Manufacture: The London Fog in British Fiction from Dickens to Woolf
                     (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2016).
              11.    See Caroline Levine, Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network
                     (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2015).
              12.    See Amanda Anderson, Bleak Liberalism (Chicago: University of
                     Chicago Press, 2016), which makes an argument about the
                     Victorian realist novel that resonates with Isobel Armstrong’s account
                     of the double poem in her Victorian Poetry: Poetry, Poetics, and Politics
                     (London: Routledge, 1996).
              Anachronism
              MARY L. MULLEN
              I   T is timely to be untimely these days. Anachronism, long understood as
                   an error to avoid, has become a key dimension of diverse historicist
              methods. Postcolonial and queer theorists, in particular, celebrate anach-
              ronism as a visible site of dislocation that calls what counts as timely and
              what constitutes history into question.1 Espousing what Bliss Cua Lim
              calls “temporal critique,” postcolonial theorists show that the homoge-
              nous, empty time upon which Western history depends relegates
              non-Western people and practices to a previous historical moment.2 In
              turn, queer theorists question the “straight time” of history—the way lin-
              ear time reinforces heteronormative patterns of development and
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000244

