                                                                              ANTH RO POCENE, AUTH O R                              577
                   Anthropocene,” Avidly, Los Angeles Review of Books, March 22, 2015,
                   http://avidly.lareviewofbooks.org/2015/03/22/the-inhuman-anthro-
                   pocene/; and Steve Mentz, “Enter the Anthropocene, Circa 1610,” in
                   Anthropocene Reading, 43–58.
              5. See Eric Gidal, Ossianic Unconformities: Bardic Poetry in the Industrial Age.
                   (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2015); Noah Heringman,
                   “Deep Time at the Dawn of the Anthropocene,” Representations 129
                   (Winter 2015): 56–85.
              6. Christophe Bonneuil and Jean-Baptiste Fessoz, The Shock of the
                   Anthropocene: The Earth, History, and Us, trans. David Fernbach
                   (New York: Verso, 2016), 199.
              Author
              ANDREW ELFENBEIN
              I   N a typical literary critical essay, the author, rather than being a
                   consistent concept, shifts rapidly among different, sometimes incom-
              patible assumptions, evidence, and purposes: a biographical person, a
              synonym for the narrator, an implied presence governing an entire
              work, a metonym lending coherence to a career, an item in a list charac-
              terizing a movement or a period, the receiver or producer of literary or
              contextual influences. This mosaic is and is not productive. It enables a
              shorthand that lets literary critics gloss over complex, messy questions to
              zero in on textual analysis. Yet those messy questions never go away and
              haunt the margins of analysis with unfinished business. Literary critics
              have not ignored Foucault’s “What is an Author?” but they have skipped
              its relevance to their own practice.1 The large question of “What is an
              author?” has blocked the smaller but more pressing question, “What
              should an author be in a work of literary criticism?”
                      I list some familiar manifestations of the author found in much lit-
              erary criticism. I developed this list by generating all the different ver-
              sions of the author that appeared in a single paragraph in a
              representative work of Victorian literary criticism; I am less interested
              in criticizing this work than in describing figurations of the author
              found throughout scholarship.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000281

                    578          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                            1. Author as Mind: Authors’ minds are not accessible except through
                    their writing. So, using a post hoc propter hoc logic whereby causes are
                    known by their effects, critics use authors’ works to posit pre-existing
                    minds as their origin. Thoughts are assumed to be in a mind in the
                    way that a chair is in a room. Language is the vehicle whereby this inter-
                    nal thought receives external expression. In such formulations, written
                    language mirrors thought: the existence of language as a code with con-
                    ventions and restrictions at the level of phonology, morphology, syntax,
                    and semantics that might influence or affect writing rarely matters.
                    Writing is the pure imprint of the author’s mind.2
                            2. Author as the Object of Evaluation: Although contemporary crit-
                    icism has moved away from the evaluative language of earlier criticism,
                    evaluations rarely remain absent. Critics may judge an author’s work,
                    but they also judge authors’ life choices, politics, religion, and romantic
                    choices, especially when these do not conform to early twenty-first
                    century mores. Such evaluations say as much about the critics doing
                    the judging as they do about the authors, but the occasion for making
                    them remains a powerful motive for the author’s presence in criticism.
                            3. Author as Biographical Fact: Although authorial texts are open to
                    interpretation, biographical facts usually occupy the status of unques-
                    tioned truth in literary critical essay. Moreover, these facts are held to
                    be relevant to criticism, as if the New Critics had never raised the possi-
                    bility of the biographical fallacy.3 What puzzles me most is that life is
                    assumed to be an obvious and straightforward origin for writing. The
                    transformative work that goes into turning autobiographical memories
                    into writing can be glossed over through reference to biographical fact.
                    Such fact is held to have weirdly coercive power over authorial agency,
                    as if the fact that something happened to an author necessitated that
                    he or she write about it. Yet authors experience many things that they
                    do not write about, and write about many things that they have not expe-
                    rienced. Yet, at least for this figuration of the author, at some level, even
                    things that do not seem to be directly rooted in autobiographical experi-
                    ence can, with enough ingenuity, be linked to it.
                            4. Author as Views: In this version of the author, works by an author
                    advance a view, which becomes a metonym for the whole. Just what it
                    means for a work to express a view is not specified: how often does the
                    view have to be articulated? By whom? In what contexts? How do we rec-
                    ognize a view that is “advanced” from one that just appears but cannot
                    stand as a metonym for it? Such views supposedly belong not only to
                    works but also to authors because they are the source. As such, the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000281

                                                                                                               AUTH O R             579
              author is a principle of coherence whereby a work written earlier in a
              career is relevant many years later, although the person who wrote earlier
              may have quite different biographical, financial, and authorial circum-
              stances from the one who wrote later. Literary critics more generally
              assume that authors’ views remain constant unless there is evidence to
              the contrary. Whether or not views remain consistent can be a topic of con-
              troversy, but both sides agree that authors’ works are appropriate evidence
              for judging their views.
                      5. Author as Producer of Complexity: This is a slippery category.
              Longstanding disciplinary practice encourages critics to view works in
              terms of ambiguities, contradictions, and tensions, and noticing such has
              become a hallmark of worthwhile criticism. Yet just how they arrived
              there is not certain. At times, the work becomes a metonym for the author,
              as if the work’s complexities have an origin in the author’s uncertainties or
              confusions. At other times, as Amanda Anderson has argued, authors
              receive “aggrandized agency,” whereby they rise above the contradictions
              of their historical moment to offer a privileged perspective; Anderson
              noted this aggrandizement especially in feminist criticism, but it is present
              more broadly.4 Scholars may also treat tensions in a work as reflections of
              tensions in a culture. While critics may shy away from assuming that a
              work directly reflects a historical moment (although, as I have noted,
              they do assume such reflection with respect to biography), they locate
              the source of a work’s contradictions in larger contradictions of a discourse.
                      This list arose from reading one paragraph in the work of one critic:
              a broader survey of criticism would yield many more images. Almost from
              sentence to sentence in literary criticism, the author is a shapeshifter,
              varying in function, evidence, and agency. Henry James complained
              that nineteenth-century novels were “large loose baggy monsters.”5 If
              James were to look at Victorian literary criticism, however, he would
              find that loose baggy monstrosity has not disappeared but has found a
              new home: the author. Intense focus on textual analysis has come at
              the expense of figuring the author coherently. Before close textual scru-
              tiny can continue productively, literary critics need to confront unsettling
              questions about authorship that have for so long been swept aside.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Michael Foucault, “What is an Author?,” in Aesthetics, Method, and
                   Epistemology, trans. Josué V. Harari, ed. James D. Faubion (New York:
                   New Press, 1998), 205–22.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000281

                    580          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    2. For a powerful criticism of this figuration of the author, see Nancy
                          Armstrong and Leonard Tennenhouse, “The Mind of Milton,” ch. 1
                          of The Imaginary Puritan: Literature, Intellectual Labor, and the Origins
                          of Personal Life (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 27–46.
                    3. For the classic New Critical statement, see Frank H. Ellis, “Gray’s
                          Elegy: The Biographical Problem in Literary Criticism,” PMLA 66,
                          no. 6 (1951): 971–1008.
                    4. Amanda Anderson, “The Temptations of Aggrandized Agency:
                          Feminist Histories and the Horizon of Modernity,” Victorian Studies
                          43, no. 1 (2000): 43–65.
                    5. Henry James, Preface to The Tragic Muse (New York: Charles
                          Scribner’s Sons, 1922), x.
                    Authorship
                    ANDREA SELLERI
                    L       ET us imagine that a diverse group of scholars of English literature
                            were asked to provide a one-minute explanation of why authorship
                    is a worthwhile subject for academic enquiry. Prima facie, the facts of
                    the matter seem straightforward: a person conceives a series of ideas,
                    puts them in writing, and publishes them; if enough people are prepared
                    to pay to read the results, the author gets a share of the profit; if the writ-
                    ing brings about a crime or misdemeanour (e.g. slander or plagiarism),
                    the author is responsible in the eyes of the law.1 But in contrast to this
                    straightforwardness on paper, literary scholars continue to produce an
                    enormous quantity of research dealing with “authorship.” Nor is this usu-
                    ally a matter of determining who wrote some unsigned piece (the most
                    intuitive interpretation of the term). Articles are written, lectures given,
                    bids for research grants tremulously penned to study a concept that to
                    the layperson may not appear to need such an expense of intellectual
                    application. So, why is authorship interesting?
                            I suspect that the immediate mental associations prompted by this
                    bald request would be strikingly different for different literary scholars,
                    depending on the prevalent directions that inquiry has taken in their sub-
                    field. Those of a philosophical bent, for example, would likely cast their
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000281

