                                                                                                       B E AU T Y, B OY             587
              6. May Morris, William Morris. Artist Writer Socialist. Volume the Second
                   (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1936), 165.
              7. Morris, William Morris, 413.
              8. On the Exhibitions, see Seth Koven, “The Whitechapel Picture
                   Exhibitions and the Politics of Seeing,” in Museum Culture: Histories,
                   Discourses, Spectacles, ed. Daniel J. Sherman and Irit Rogoff
                   (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1994), 22–48; and
                   Diana Maltz, “In ample halls adorned with mysterious things aesthetic:
                   Toynbee Hall as Aesthetic Haven,” in British Aestheticism and the Urban
                   Working Classes, 1870–1900. Beauty for the People (Basingstoke: Palgrave
                   Macmillan, 2006), 67–97.
              9. Henrietta Barnett, “Pictures for the People,” in Practicable Socialism:
                   Essays on Social Reform, 2nd ed. (London: Longmans, Green & Co.,
                   1894), 175.
              Boy
              MATTHEW KAISER
                      Though she called me ‘boy’ so often, and with a carelessness that was far
                      from complimentary, she was of about my own age.
                                                                           —Charles Dickens, Great Expectations1
              B      EYE; boye; boie; boi. It is unclear why the voiced bilabial stop known
                      as the “b” sound, when harnessed to the business end of the dip-
              thong “oi,” should appeal to the medieval ear as a means of communicat-
              ing diminutive or low status in male persons. What is clear, however, is
              that, by the early thirteenth century, the slang term “boye,” introduced
              to England by Dutch sailors and Frisian merchants, and watered liberally
              by tavern badinage, had taken root in English. By the time Edward I
              expelled the Jews in 1290 and conquered Wales, the monosyllable had
              experienced a lexical growth spurt, acquiring three related but distinct
              meanings: male child; knave; and male servant or slave. “Boy” as
              “knave” (the dubious, illegitimate or base man) barely survived the four-
              teenth century, petering out in the fifteenth, but “boy” as “male child”
              (the proto-man, the not-yet man, the unformed or half-grown man)
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:54, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000311

                    588          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    throve, as did “boy” as “slave” or “servant” (the partial, lowly or quasi-
                    man), becoming a common term for a menial, subaltern or underling.
                    Carried by imperial winds to Africa, Polynesia, China, India, and North
                    America, “boy” served as a byword in the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-
                    turies for “male slave,” as well as a ready-made epithet and condescend-
                    ing term of endearment for a male person of color.
                            Boy is man’s other Other, if not his male Other exactly, for boyishness is
                    occasionally attributed to female persons, then man’s unfeminine-
                    yet-unmanly Other. The boy is the seedbed of the man, the uncultivated
                    yet fecund soil from which masculinity is said to spring; at the same time,
                    however, the boy is a conceptual quicksand threatening to swallow man
                    whole, return him to a primordial and degraded state. Paranoid
                    man must repress, distance, exorcise, kill the boy within. “I have done
                    with men and women,” Miss Havisham nihilistically declares, a twinkle in
                    her eye.2 She wants a boy. Why a boy? With the jagged edge of her broken
                    heart, she will unleash the death drive dormant in bourgeois man. She
                    will imprison a random male in eternal boyhood, in lack. For many
                    Victorians, including Dickens, the boy is the horizon of modern selfhood,
                    where the sun rises and sets. The boy carries in his heart the trauma of
                    civilization.
                            The identity crisis at the core of Great Expectations (1861), the psychic
                    wound around which Pip spins his delusional narrative of upward
                    mobility, can be traced to his misreading—or willful mishearing—of
                    the word “boy.” Mrs. Joe (Pumplechook in tow) announces that Miss
                    Havisham wants “a boy to go and play” in her house.3 Pip hears in
                    “boy” the reassuring whisper of “male child,” where his sister hears
                    only the coin-clink of “servant.” “Play” is partly to blame for Pip’s confu-
                    sion. After all, who works at play? Who is paid to be a little boy? In his
                    “labouring-boy” shoes, his face flush with shame and hope, Pip indulges
                    his employer’s “sick fancy” and plays “beggar my neighbour” with icy
                    Estella, daring to think he might be auditioning for role of adopted
                    son, unaware that he is being enslaved: made a whipping boy for Miss
                    Havisham’s little ward.4 To make matters worse, Pip later learns that he
                    is himself the ward of a knave, that he is a boy’s boy. “Dear boy,”
                    Magwitch sighs, and Pip cringes.5 The boy is the ghost at every man’s
                    banquet. Thus, Trabb’s boy relentlessly shadows Pip, leaving mortified
                    manhood, fraudulent respectability, in his wake.
                            If, as Franco Moretti contends, the bildungsroman is “the ‘symbolic
                    form’ of modernity,” and youth, “modernity’s ‘essence,’ the sign of a
                    world that seeks its meaning in the future rather than in the past,” then
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:54, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000311

                                                                                                                        B OY        589
              we might conceive of boyhood as the atavistic, autotelic state that pre-
              cedes the symbolic awakening of modern consciousness.6 In the boy,
              modernity catches a disquieting glimpse of its own tenuousness. Like
              Joe the Fat Boy in The Pickwick Papers (1837), or Tennyson’s lotus-eaters,
              the boy embodies civilizational narcolepsy, a retreat from the false con-
              sciousness of progress, from the way of the world. The second a boy
              takes his future in hand, he becomes a little man, a restless youth, impa-
              tient, productive: profane. Think of Wuthering Heights (1847): a love story
              between a gipsy boy and a whip-wielding tomboy, between two future-
              destroying “boys,” who resist the forces of youth until youth overwhelms
              them, severing their sacred bond, exiling them to manhood and woman-
              hood. Is it any wonder so many Victorian writers turn to anthropology to
              make sense of the “dread irrationality” of boys?7 “Surely they dwell,”
              Robert Louis Stevenson muses, “in a mythological epoch, and are not
              the contemporaries of their parents.”8
                      The Victorians sacrificed boys on the altar of civilization. While it is
              true that the middle classes loved their sons, coddled and doted upon
              them, spent millions to entertain, educate and cultivate them, lavished
              them with toys and books, with a tantalizing culture of boyhood, they
              did so with one goal in mind: to kill the boy, to teach him how to become
              a man, to escort him as expeditiously as possible from his abject—and
              provisional—state. Insofar as the boy managed to survive this genocide,
              he became a scapegoat. Even today, we purge the boy from our hearts.
              Old boys’ club. Bad boy. Boys will be boys. When men misbehave, or
              when their masculinity becomes “toxic,” more often than not that toxic-
              ity is attributed to the boy within, a man’s violence blamed paradoxically
              on his failure to hunt down and kill that little creature. Oh, boy. If one
              plaintive syllable could somehow communicate the tragic history of
              modernity, surely that syllable is “boy.”
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Charles Dickens, Great Expectations (New York: Everyman’s Library,
                   1992), 51.
              2. Dickens, Great Expectations, 53.
              3. Dickens, Great Expectations, 47.
              4. Dickens, Great Expectations, 54–55.
              5. Dickens, Great Expectations, 328.
              6. Franco Moretti, The Way of the World: The Bildungsroman in European
                   Culture (London: Verso, 1987), 5.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:54, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000311

                    590          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    7. Robert Louis Stevenson, Virginibus Puerisque and Other Papers, in The
                          Works of Robert Louis Stevenson, Vol. 2, ed. Edmund Gosse (London:
                          Cassell, 1906), 289–443, 423.
                    8. Stevenson, Virginibus, 423.
                    Britain
                    KIRSTIE BLAIR
                    I    N the opening of this brief polemic, I must acknowledge conscious
                          bias: as of 5 a.m. on the morning after the Brexit referendum, I am
                    a card-carrying member of the Scottish National Party. This was not antic-
                    ipated. Brought up in Belfast as an Ulster-Scots Unionist with a determi-
                    nation to be “British” rather than “Irish,” and educated in the most
                    English of institutions, I am now in the awkward position of being
                    grateful for the Irish state’s continuing political claim on Northern
                    Ireland, which renders me an EU citizen. Once, I was clear that I was
                    British. Now, I am not so sure. Once, I considered myself a scholar of
                    Victorian Britain. Now, I am increasingly aware that up until 2013 I was
                    exclusively a scholar of Victorian England, and, in the present moment,
                    my research is strongly aligned with “Scottish studies,” a field which has
                    had surprisingly little dialogue with “Victorian studies.”
                            In recent years, the field of Victorian literature and culture has
                    seen crucial, transformative work on global Victorian studies, world
                    Victorianism, transnational, transatlantic, transcultural, and cosmopoli-
                    tan Victorian studies. This has involved substantial questioning of nation-
                    alisms and national boundaries. What I want to suggest, however, is that
                    in placing British literature within a more “global” concept of Victorian
                    literature and culture, the complexities of national, regional and local
                    identities within “Victorian Britain” have sometimes been subsumed or
                    ignored. How many works of scholarship on British-based writers or
                    texts are published each year in which the phrases “Victorian culture”
                    and “Victorian literature” actually mean English culture and literature?
                    Are we in danger of reproducing a clustering of resources not simply
                    towards England, but towards London and the south of England,
                    which has been increasingly recognized and critiqued in twenty-first
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:39:54, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000311

