                    612          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    4. Charles Dickens, David Copperfield, ed. Jerome Buckley (New York:
                          Norton, 1990), 9.
                    5. Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species, ed. George Levine (New York:
                          Barnes & Noble, 2004), 76–77.
                    6. Alex Woloch, The One vs. the Many: Minor Characters and the Space of the
                          Protagonist in the Novel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003).
                    7. Steven Shapin, A Social History of Truth: Civility and Science in
                          Seventeenth-Century England (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
                          1994).
                    Character
                    JILL GALVAN
                    T       HE scholarly story of Victorian character has long been a story of
                            interiority. According to Deidre Lynch’s influential account, by the
                    end of the eighteenth century, print consumers were stratified by their
                    approach to character: reading with taste (distinctly from the masses)
                    meant reading for interpretable insides.1 Ian Watt’s classic history of
                    the novel presumes a dense psychology in describing the novelistic indi-
                    vidual as a modern subject navigating the choices of her socioeconomic
                    world.2 Readings premised on psychical conflict likewise assume inner-
                    ness. Since the work of Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar, for instance,
                    it hardly seems possible not to read a character like Jane Eyre as riven
                    by deep selfhood.3
                            But in recent scholarship, another story is emerging. Broadly speak-
                    ing, this newer work emphasizes character as a dynamically relational
                    form: a mobile entity shaped by interaction—whether with the reader,
                    other characters in the storyworld, or both. Character here is experiential
                    in a nearly physical sense—a matter of movement, perception, and
                    change. It exists formally or phenomenologically, in time and space.
                    An early inkling of this approach is Alex Woloch’s The One Vs. the
                    Many, which reads fictional persons as jostling for space and for the read-
                    er’s limited attention within a crowded “character-system.”4 More
                    recently, S. Pearl Brilmyer interprets Middlemarch’s characters as soft,
                    mutable beings with attributes emerging from their encounters in a
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000384

                                                                                                        C HARACTER                  613
              material field.5 A key concept for Brilmyer is affect—felt, sensory
              phenomena—and this is also the basis of Summer Star’s reading of
              Middlemarch’s realism: George Eliot’s peopled environment seems genu-
              ine because of readers’ “liminally conscious perception that moment to
              moment draws us to the object world and substantiates belonging to it as
              fellow, bodily objects.”6 Jonathan Farina’s study of character, while con-
              cerned with prose turns of phrase rather than material spatiality, also
              ties nineteenth-century fictional personhood to form and affect. For
              writers ranging from Jane Austen to Anthony Trollope, he suggests,
              character was a relational style comprising both people and things; selves,
              inextricable from objects, acquired moral and emotional value through a
              performative mode that was supple, tactile, frictional, alive with
              “frisson.”7
                      With their attention to character as an experience of contact, such
              perspectives put pressure on the idea of interiority. Indeed, in a tangen-
              tial trend, other critics have questioned the individual’s private outlines,
              claiming, rather, intersubjectivity or a blending with (social or natural)
              surroundings. This latter work, too, has a strong phenomenological
              bent. David Kurnick suggests that in reading the novel as a genre defined
              by interiority, critics have overlooked its yearning for the collective, exter-
              nal space of the theater and thus its “fundamental ambiguity” about the
              “public/private distinction.”8 Rachel Ablow’s book on Victorian pain
              argues for the “impersonality” of this most troubling of affects. Pain’s
              ontological incommunicability is a means for authors to navigate, and
              sometimes transcend, the distinction between self and other.9 In an
              essay linking Tess of the D’Urbervilles to psychoanalytical object-relations
              theory, Alicia Christoff sees Thomas Hardy’s protagonist as “diffuse
              and dissolved” and her solitary moments as inclusive of other presences,
              not unlike the experience of the novel-reader herself.10
                      But perhaps the most provocative new views of fictional personhood
              are those that, more than simply tempering a notion of innerness,
              emphatically deny its existence. Brilmyer proposes that the typical
              Middlemarch character is not, as has often been thought, a “hidden or
              buried kernel of personality, but instead . . . a socially determined mate-
              rial <U+FB01>guration.”11 Interestingly, this denial also appears in the work of
              recent modernist scholars. In general, in fact, there has been a remark-
              able overlap between Victorian and modernist theories of narrated
              selves. Certain concepts—non-individuation, embodied experience,
              affective relation, and the difference between interiority/depth and exte-
              riority/surface—are cropping up in both. For Rochelle Rives, drawing on
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000384

                    614          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Maurice Merleau-Ponty, modernist authors turn away from “humanist”
                    models of discrete psychology, implying the “impersonality” of the encoun-
                    ter and its emotional, ethical, and political potentialities. Rives puts this in
                    dramatically spatial terms: rejecting the belief that “humans have depths to
                    be plumbed or expressed,” modernist authors imagine interaction on a
                    “flatten[ed]” “surface” that “exteriorizes collective emotional experi-
                    ence.”12 Omri Moses stresses the modernist (e.g., Bergsonian) fascination
                    with vitalism—living interconnection and flux—to offer, similarly, an
                    account wherein ethics arise from momentary, affective responses. Most
                    relevantly here, he asserts a difference between this dynamic state of
                    being and static Victorian personality. Whereas Henry James, Gertrude
                    Stein, and T. S. Eliot envision character as situational and processual,
                    George Eliot’s selves are “centered” and limited in moral action by the
                    “unity and orderliness” of their social environment.13
                            But as is apparent from the stimulating Victorianist criticism sur-
                    veyed above, such distinctions are misleading—though also entirely pre-
                    dictable, given the way English studies often charts the course of
                    literature. Moses’s account is tacitly one of aesthetic progression: in the
                    twentieth century, fiction outgrows its faith in coherent selves, becoming
                    more attentive to the vagaries and perplexities of existence, as well as the
                    flexibility of temporal, spatial, and (hence) narrative form. Scholars often
                    note that historical periodization risks obscuring valuable insights. And
                    yet on the topic of aesthetics and representation, the distinction between
                    Victorianism and modernism seems intransigent, often, as in this case, to
                    the diminution of the former.
                            In recent studies of character, however, I see an opportunity to jet-
                    tison the idea of progression and to trace cross-period resonances
                    instead. As this work highlights, questions of social ethics, often associ-
                    ated with Victorian literature, do not mutually exclude attention to per-
                    ceptual and sensual form, often associated with modernist literature.
                    Aiding this reconciliation is the affective turn in both subfields.
                    Intriguingly, Kristy Martin’s book on the “rhythms of sympathy,” though
                    focused on modernist authors, includes George Eliot in the introduction,
                    demonstrating the disciplinary bridge in even this most seemingly quin-
                    tessential of Victorian affects. For Martin, sympathy—here theorized, like
                    Moses’s character, through a discourse of vitalism—moves between, and
                    therefore disturbs the boundaries of, individuals. Its ethic involves not
                    deliberation or “autonomy” but instead “sensuous and epiphanic” feel-
                    ing.14 I’d suggest that with all this attention to vital dynamism, the fiction
                    of individuality, and the interrelation of people with their surroundings,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000384

                                                                                                        C HARACTER                  615
              we are witnessing in both subfields a phenomenologically posthuman
              shift: a serious consideration of how we might read characters and their
              shared embodiment in light of the fallacies of liberal humanism.15
                      At the same time, paradoxical as it may seem, I’d urge that scholars
              not abandon the concept of interiority altogether, as simply synonymous
              with determined psychological identity. For on the contrary, the new phys-
              icalist view of character accentuates interiority (or depth) as itself a dimen-
              sional concept, and that we can read its interrelational position in multiple
              productive ways.16 Contact between persons may well entail an experience
              of continuity. But, as narratives from Middlemarch (and prior) on through
              To the Lighthouse (and afterward) also depict, that moment of contact just
              as often entails an impression of isolation, misunderstanding, difference: a
              sense of separate insideness, necessarily opaque or exterior from the per-
              spective of someone else. This, too, is a significant feeling. It is also signifi-
              cant aesthetically, as a matter of perception and point of view. “She could
              be herself, by herself,” Mrs. Ramsay thinks, in Woolf’s novel. “Beneath it is
              all dark, it is all spreading, it is unfathomably deep, but now and again, we
              rise to the surface, and that is what you see us by.”17 Part of what fascinates
              readers about Mrs. Ramsay, as about Dorothea Brooke, or any number of
              Victorian characters, is the lived impermeability of that surface—mysteri-
              ous, sometimes socially troublesome—even as she flexes, vitally, ethically,
              to her narrative environment.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. Deidre Lynch, The Economy of Character: Novels, Market Culture, and the
                     Business of Inner Meaning (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1998).
                2. Ian Watt, The Rise of the Novel: Studies in Defoe, Richardson, and Fielding
                     (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1957).
                3. Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar, The Madwoman in the Attic: The
                     Woman Writer and the Nineteenth-Century Literary Imagination (New
                     Haven: Yale University Press, 1979).
                4. Alex Woloch, The One vs. the Many: Minor Characters and the Space of the
                     Protagonist in the Novel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003), 14.
                5. S. Pearl Brilmyer, “Plasticity, Form, and the Matter of Character in
                     Middlemarch,” Representations 130, no. 1 (2015): 60–83.
                6. Summer J. Star, “Feeling Real in Middlemarch,” ELH 80, no. 3 (2013):
                     839–69, 842.
                7. Jonathan Farina, Everyday Words and the Character of Prose in Nineteenth-
                     Century Britain (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2017), 20.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000384

                    616          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       8. David Kurnick, Empty Houses: Theatrical Failure and the Novel
                            (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2012), 3.
                       9. Rachel Ablow, Victorian Pain (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
                            2017), 3.
                    10. Alicia Christoff, “Alone with Tess,” NOVEL: A Forum on Fiction 48, no. 1
                            (2015): 18–44, 25.
                    11. Brilmyer, “Plasticity,” 71.
                    12. Rochelle Rives, Modernist Impersonalities: Affect, Authority, and the
                            Subject (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012), 8, 14.
                    13. Omri Moses, Out of Character: Modernism, Vitalism, Psychic Life
                            (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2014), 6, 9.
                    14. Kristy Martin, Modernism and the Rhythms of Sympathy: Vernon Lee,
                            Virginia Woolf, D.H. Lawrence (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
                            2013), 7, 10.
                    15. This upshot has generally been indirect, though some critics, e.g.,
                            Ablow and Rives, consider liberalism and humanism explicitly.
                    16. For other accounts of the spatiality of depth hermeneutics, in
                            response to recent critical dismissals of it, see Deanna Kreisel,
                            “The Madwoman on the Third Story: Jane Eyre in Space,” PMLA
                            131, no. 1 (2016): 101–15, and Zachary Samalin, “Plumbing the
                            Depths, Scouring the Surface: Henry Mayhew’s Scavenger
                            Hermeneutics,” New Literary History 48, no. 2 (2017): 387–410.
                    17. Virginia Woolf, To the Lighthouse (San Diego: Harcourt Brace,
                            1981), 62.
                    Child
                    MARAH GUBAR
                    “O            NE must have a heart of stone,” Oscar Wilde allegedly quipped,
                                  “to read the death of Little Nell without laughing.” It’s odd that
                    so many of us know this bon mot, since it comes to us not from Wilde him-
                    self, but from a second-hand recollection of a conversation with him
                    reported thirty years after he died.1 Perhaps we’ve embraced this epi-
                    gram not just because it’s funny, but also because we like to think of
                    Wilde as a witty iconoclast who anticipates our own skepticism about
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:31, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000384

