                                                                                                        C HARACTER                  609
              Character
              JONATHAN FARINA
              “C          HARACTER ” for most of the nineteenth century primarily
                           denominated neither persons (fictional or real) nor moral integ-
              rity but the epistemic and aesthetic object of prose, a distinct form of
              knowledge and style of representation marked by a recognizable set of
              colloquial signatures. To be sure, fictional and real personages were com-
              monly and conspicuously the subjects of characterization, and such per-
              sonages were in turn often the vehicles for promoting various moral
              values, including the modesty, perseverance, thrift, responsibility, indus-
              try, and liberal individualism that Samuel Smiles describes as character in
              his best-selling Self-Help (1859) and Character (1871). The predominance
              of the novel has, however, overshadowed how “character” named a more
              comprehensive form of representation that also played remarkable roles
              in other discourses and genres. In these discourses, characterization
              afforded legitimate, sympathetic form to abstractions and objects that
              might have otherwise appeared alienating, immoral, impersonal, or
              uninteresting.
                      Victorian writings about natural history, geology, architecture, paint-
              ing, furniture and the decorative arts, sculpture, and fashion manifestly
              show that Victorians were as comfortable as we are ascribing “character”
              to things other than people and that such things were not always deemed
              to be metonymically related to the character of their owners. Given the
              prevalence of free indirect discourse and psychological realism, interior-
              ity and depth have dominated critical analyses of character, and certainly
              the epistemology of depth intersects with the epistemology of character.
              Deidre Lynch reinvigorated the study of character by attending to the ety-
              mology of the word as a mark, like a line of William Hogarth’s caricature,
              which limns the balance between individuality and typicality, caricature
              and deep character.1 But Lynch’s book traces the incorporation of
              such marks—in various prose techniques—into a social economy that
              traded in depth and that restricts “character” to the interiority of person-
              ages. “Character” was not synonymous with depth; for Victorians it was
              indexed by a wider range of rhetorical forms.
                      The natural historical connotation of character exemplifies how the
              category worked across a range of domains. As Michel Foucault explains,
              “the character, as established by natural history,” marks selected organic
              features not because they most aptly distinguish the essence or identity of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000372

                    610          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    an organism but because they make “it possible both to indicate the indi-
                    vidual and to situate it in a space of generalities that fit inside one
                    another.”2 Victorian philosophical debates about classification reinforce
                    the resonance of character as a category of knowledge outside of fiction
                    and moral philosophy and affirm how characters signified not merely the
                    identity or essential interiority of an organism but instead its sociality and
                    relationality. Characters, understood this way, concurrently articulate the
                    individuality and collective belonging of an organism.
                            Of course fictional personages have names, gestures, objects, bodies,
                    and expressions that similarly individuate and generalize them. Thus the
                    British writers most known for their production of character—William
                    Shakespeare, Walter Scott, and Charles Dickens—were routinely praised
                    by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Hazlitt, W. H. Horne and others for compos-
                    ing personages who were both individuals and types. The correlation
                    between character and individuality and typicality animated writings by
                    William Whewell, John Stuart Mill, and others who promoted induction
                    by appraising its effect on character. Such debates insisted upon the espe-
                    cial Englishness of induction, as if remediating particularity and general-
                    ity was a national trait distinctly redolent of Francis Bacon and
                    Shakespeare. John Herschel, like Whewell, explicitly describes induction
                    as a moral habit of “ascent” that cultivates the character of the scientist
                    even as it legitimated the creditability of his prose. Iterations of “particu-
                    lar” and “general” seem to effect this moral work.
                            I elsewhere write at length about an array of additional rhetorical sig-
                    natures that Victorians registered as “character.”3 These signatures
                    include the word “turn” as it signified a trope, an affective shock, a rhe-
                    torical change of topic, an histrionic gesture, a rote industrial or mechan-
                    ical movement, and a summary moral accounting. “Whether I shall turn
                    out to be the hero of my own life,” David Copperfield famously begins;4 and
                    “Under nature, the slightest differences of structure or constitution may
                    well turn the nicely-balanced scale in the struggle for life,” Darwin writes
                    in the Origin of Species.5 From Jane Eyre and The Mill on the Floss to The
                    Descent of Man, the character of Victorian prose as much as the character
                    of its personages depends on consistent recourse to “turns” that reject
                    stasis, ignore depth, and evoke liberal, dynamic, and emotive interest.
                            Character was also realized in a recurrent “as if,” which signals
                    an investment in conjectural analogy as an alternative to empirical,
                    referential fact in discourses as diverse as the new geology of Charles
                    Lyell, the fiction of Dickens, and the physics of John Tyndall. Likewise,
                    a recurrent “but” indexes a constitutive hypocrisy and penchant for
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000372

                                                                                                        C HARACTER                  611
              friction in a legal system that was routinizing witness rebuttal and in fic-
              tion like Trollope’s that so routinizes skepticism that it disarms and trans-
              lates it into reparative recognition rather than criticism. The texture of
              Trollope’s prose is characterized, in every sense of the word, by adversa-
              tives like “and yet” that install discord so diffusely and profusely that, as
              reviews have consistently attested, it appears as a kind of gentlemanly
              “ease” instead of a kind of provocation, disclosure, suspicion, or radical
              skepticism. Prose with character is moreover marked by a penchant for
              pronouns without clear antecedents or referents, pronouns like “some-
              thing” and “that sort of thing” that for writers like George Eliot instanti-
              ate an otherwise ineffable interiority but also betray a frustrating lack of
              clarity. The character of prose depends precisely on the liberal, gestural
              relation to reality that underwrites the delineation of both Dorothea
              Brooke and her bumbling uncle.
                      Alex Woloch has recharged the study of character with a canny
              Marxist reading of how depth of character emerges spatially as a function
              of the subordination of secondary characters, whose relative marginaliza-
              tion creates the effect of protagonicity.6 Respecting the claims of
              nineteenth-century critics, for whom character was a necessary if unstable
              heuristic category, we should open up this character space to things other
              than personages, to see character as the object of a specific prose style or
              texture and the knowledge it affects to produce rather than as a property
              of its subjects. Characterization, distinct from the tropes of mimetic real-
              ism with which it is so often interwoven, consistently presents its world
              aslant as the product of turns, conjectures, inductions, rebuttals, abstrac-
              tions, and deferrals from the evident. This broader character space also
              had its politics: characterization afforded prose what Steven Shapin calls
              “epistemic decorum,” the requisite manners and moral signatures of
              credible truth, even as it rejected transparency.7
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Deidre Shauna Lynch, The Economy of Character: Novels, Market Culture,
                   and the Business of Inner Meaning (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
                   1998), 3.
              2. Michel Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human
                   Sciences (New York: Vintage, 1994), 159.
              3. Jonathan Farina, Everyday Words and the Character of Prose in
                   Nineteenth-Century Britain (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
                   2017).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000372

                    612          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    4. Charles Dickens, David Copperfield, ed. Jerome Buckley (New York:
                          Norton, 1990), 9.
                    5. Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species, ed. George Levine (New York:
                          Barnes & Noble, 2004), 76–77.
                    6. Alex Woloch, The One vs. the Many: Minor Characters and the Space of the
                          Protagonist in the Novel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003).
                    7. Steven Shapin, A Social History of Truth: Civility and Science in
                          Seventeenth-Century England (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
                          1994).
                    Character
                    JILL GALVAN
                    T       HE scholarly story of Victorian character has long been a story of
                            interiority. According to Deidre Lynch’s influential account, by the
                    end of the eighteenth century, print consumers were stratified by their
                    approach to character: reading with taste (distinctly from the masses)
                    meant reading for interpretable insides.1 Ian Watt’s classic history of
                    the novel presumes a dense psychology in describing the novelistic indi-
                    vidual as a modern subject navigating the choices of her socioeconomic
                    world.2 Readings premised on psychical conflict likewise assume inner-
                    ness. Since the work of Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar, for instance,
                    it hardly seems possible not to read a character like Jane Eyre as riven
                    by deep selfhood.3
                            But in recent scholarship, another story is emerging. Broadly speak-
                    ing, this newer work emphasizes character as a dynamically relational
                    form: a mobile entity shaped by interaction—whether with the reader,
                    other characters in the storyworld, or both. Character here is experiential
                    in a nearly physical sense—a matter of movement, perception, and
                    change. It exists formally or phenomenologically, in time and space.
                    An early inkling of this approach is Alex Woloch’s The One Vs. the
                    Many, which reads fictional persons as jostling for space and for the read-
                    er’s limited attention within a crowded “character-system.”4 More
                    recently, S. Pearl Brilmyer interprets Middlemarch’s characters as soft,
                    mutable beings with attributes emerging from their encounters in a
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:40:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000372

