                                                                                       CHIL D, CIRC ULATION                         621
                6. Samuel Taylor Coleridge, “Frost at Midnight,” in Fears in solitude, writ-
                     ten in 1798, during the alarm of an invasion. To which are added, France,
                     an ode; and Frost at midnight (London: J. Johnson, 1798), 19–23, lines
                     5–6, 8, 10. I relied on the facsimile of this volume available on Gale’s
                     Eighteenth Century Collections Online database.
                7. Hood, “Parental Ode,” line 19.
                8. Adam Mansbach and Ricardo Cortés, Go the Fuck to Sleep (New York:
                     Akashic Books, 2011); Thomas Hood, “A Serenade,” in Hood, Comic
                     Annual, 162–64, lines 1, 4, 16, 26.
                9. Judith Plotz, Romanticism and the Vocation of Childhood (New York:
                     Palgrave, 2001), xvi.
              10. Hood, Comic Annual, 153.
              11. Hood, “Parental Ode,” lines 17–18, 57.
              12. Laurel Bradley, “From Eden to Empire: John Everett Millais’s Cherry
                     Ripe,” Victorian Studies 34, no. 2 (1991): 179–203, 192; Pamela
                     Tamarkin Reis, “Victorian Centerfold: Another Look at Millais’s Cherry
                     Ripe,” Victorian Studies 35, no. 2 (1992): 201–05, 201; Robert M.
                     Polhemus, “John Millais’s Children: Faith, Erotics, and the Woodman’s
                     Daughter,” Victorian Studies 37, no. 3 (1994): 433–50, 444.
              13. Quoted in Ronald Pearsall, The Worm in the Bud: The World of Victorian
                     Sexuality (Stroud: Sutton, 2003), 316.
              14. T. G. Stowers was most likely Thomas Gordon Stowers (1854–1938), a
                     London-born painter and illustrator who exhibited work at the Royal
                     Academy and the Royal Society of British Artists during the 1880s and
                     early 90s. If he created Cherry Un-Ripe, then he did it in his late 20s.
              Many thanks to Anna Redcay (who helped me to find Cherry Un-Ripe),
              Mark Szarko (who helped me to figure out who drew it), and Michèle
              Mendelssohn (who helped me to source the epigram about Little Nell).
              Circulation
              TANYA AGATHOCLEOUS AND JASON R. RUDY
                     HIS was supposed to be an entry on the “Global” but there was too
              T      much to say—which both begs the question of the usefulness of the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000402

                    622          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    term and speaks to the degree to which we’ve left the nation behind as a
                    literary paradigm. “Global” is vexing because it encompasses a wide range
                    of more specific paradigms (such as imperial, international, transna-
                    tional, global South, Oceanic Studies, postcolonial, geopolitical) and
                    thus flattens out and depoliticizes the uneven terrain across which liter-
                    ature travels. Antoinette Burton has argued, for instance, that the term
                    often masks the imperialism or neoimperialism that is the context for
                    the creation and circulation of literature designated global.1
                            Rather than try to make literature fit into one of these frames, then,
                    we might focus instead on how texts create frames themselves—through
                    their use of literary conventions, rhetoric, and styles of address—and how
                    their modes and means of circulation produce reframings that change
                    not only their meaning but sometimes their genre. Texts that travel trans-
                    nationally trace specific routes across regions, continents, and bodies of
                    water. Taking stock of these routes and the way they resonate within
                    and across texts can help us to avoid the leveling and oversimplifying
                    effects of grander but looser terms such as global or imperial.
                            The case of Henry Kendall is instructive. In early 1861, settler
                    Australia waited for news of Robert Burke and William Wills, explorers
                    attempting to traverse the Australian interior from Melbourne to the
                    Gulf of Carpentaria. The goal was to conquer not just the temperate
                    Australian coastlines, but the entire continent—and in so doing, to
                    prove that “alien whites” could eventually “transform . . . from sojourners
                    into settlers.”2 The early 1860s saw multiple efforts to explore the conti-
                    nent’s dry and punishing center. John McDouall Stuart led several expe-
                    ditions from Adelaide, returning each time in defeat—“white-haired,
                    exhausted and nearly blind”—yet still determined to further the work
                    of European expansion.3
                            Burke and Wills’s fate—their death from malnutrition in the
                    outback—would not yet have been known when the Sydney Morning
                    Herald published Kendall’s “Fainting by the Way” in August 1861:
                             Swarthy wastelands, wide and woodless, glittering miles and miles away,
                             Where the South wind seldom wanders, and the winters will not stay;
                             Lurid wastelands, pent in silence, thick with hot and thirsty sighs,
                             Where the scanty thorn-leaves twinkle, with their haggard, hopeless eyes.4
                     Kendall’s poem reflects a general wariness of Australia’s bleak and forbid-
                    ding interior. Readers in 1861 likely would have overheard in the poem’s
                    trochees Longfellow’s wildly popular Hiawatha (1855), the tetrameter lines
                    of which are here doubled up. Like the white colonialists of Hiawatha who
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000402

                                                                                                     CI RCULATI ON                  623
              eventually overcome the Native American chief, Kendall’s explorers trium-
              phantly conquer the landscape, ultimately reaching “flowery hollows,
              where [they] heard a far-off stream / Singing in the moony twilight”: an opti-
              mistic conclusion to what for Burke and Wills was in fact a tragedy.
                      Once Burke and Wills’s demise was known, Kendall’s elegiac trium-
              phalism made the poem useful to Australian colonialists. Wollongong’s
              Illawarra Mercury published the poem in October, adjacent to an article
              on the “Reported Discovery of Burke and of his Companions.”5 In the
              specific context of the Mercury, the poem’s tone reflects a broader
              Australian effort to recuperate the expedition’s failure, to find value in
              the explorers’ deaths.
                      None of this contextual framing was evident a year later when the
              London Athenaeum published “Fainting by the Way.” Printed under the
              title “Verses. By Henry Kendall. (Unpublished.),” the Athenaeum editors
              find in Kendall a promising specimen of colonial poetics: “a wild, dark,
              Müller-like power of landscape-painting” that suggests the author “may
              hope . . . to be heard of again in the world of letters.”6 In the hands
              of the London editors, a nation-building poem about the white man’s
              conquest of inner Australia, epic in its aspirations, becomes merely pic-
              turesque, like the English landscape paintings of William James Müller.
              In reframing Kendall’s poem, the Athenaeum editors undermine its
              original colonial prerogative.
                      The shift from the specificity of local Australian print media to the
              London metropole, then, changes the political and aesthetic valences of
              the text and how the space within it is imagined: as static or expanding,
              global or local. In this case, the location of the periodicals in which
              the poem was published is crucial to the way it makes meaning. But the
              way periodicals themselves structured the relationship between global
              and local was also fluid and affected by the way they traveled between col-
              ony and metropole and the texts with which they interacted in each space.
                      Consider for example W. T. Stead’s audacious Review of Reviews,
              which in 1890 took the encyclopedic comparativism of the Victorian peri-
              odical to its logical conclusion by publishing extracts from a vast array of
              European, American, and colonial literary reviews for a mass audience.
              The imperialist motivations of Stead’s ambitious project were bluntly
              laid out in his first editorial: by creating a global union of newspaper
              readers educated in the affairs of the world, the Review of Reviews would
              help to “save the English Empire.” The fact that this editorial was
              addressed to “English-speaking folk” was significant, for he used this
              term as a synonym for white Anglo-Americans.7
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000402

                    624          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                            But the Review also generated an unofficial, anti-imperial spinoff. In
                    1905, its synthesizing format was borrowed by a Calcutta publication enti-
                    tled The Indian World. This journal was explicitly and cannily derivative of
                    Stead’s, but it adapted the global purview of his journal to the ends of
                    Indian nationalism. Rather than surveying reviews from around the
                    world, it collected articles about India from a series of British and
                    European reviews and also reviewed the contents of noteworthy
                    English-language Indian periodicals, thus creating a holistic picture of
                    Anglophone Indian nationalism. Gaining Stead’s approval (he wrote a
                    notice to the editor saying, “I should esteem it a privilege to assist in
                    the success of your admirable undertaking”), it simultaneously gained
                    itself an entrée into the global forum of journalistic discourse his
                    Review was attempting to shape.8
                            While the Indian World was partly inspired by Stead’s journal, it had
                    an uncanny effect on it. By imitating Stead and asking him for a letter of
                    commendation, the journal drew itself into his orbit and became one of
                    the informants on developments in India he cited most often. The
                    Review’s form and its claims to worldliness allowed the Indian World to
                    mask its anticolonialism as print culture cosmopolitanism, and to contest
                    Stead’s imperialist and white supremacist visions on the global platform
                    he had specifically designed to promote them. Stepping onto this plat-
                    form through its address to Stead (and thus its subsequent appearance
                    in extracted form in his journal), the Indian World was able to address
                    a larger public, disrupting the whiteness of the international reading
                    public that Stead was trying to materialize. Furthermore, by becoming
                    part of Stead’s world, the Indian World eventually influenced his views
                    of India and press censorship, unsettling his complacency about the pro-
                    gressive potential of liberal imperialism and making manifest the fissures
                    in his influential vision of a global public sphere.
                            In both these examples, the high-stakes contest to determine the
                    scale of the text’s frame—global or national, imperial or colonial—is
                    shaped not only by its own politics but by its shifting location and its rela-
                    tion to other, framing texts. The rapid reprinting that defined imperial
                    print circulation in the nineteenth century meant that texts were con-
                    stantly in motion across the uneven spaces of empire. While writers
                    often anticipated and shaped the way their traveling texts addressed mul-
                    tiple audiences across these spaces, reproduction could destabilize the
                    ground of power, thus reframing and recontextualizing the text’s work.
                    If form, content, and context are crucial components of literary interpre-
                    tation, so too is circulation.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000402

                                                                                       C I R C U L ATI O N, C L A SS                625
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Antoinette Burton, Empire in Question: Reading, Writing, and Teaching
                   British Imperialism (Durham: Duke University Press 2011), 278.
              2. Warwick Anderson, The Cultivation of Whiteness: Science, Health, and
                   Racial Destiny in Australia (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006), 13.
              3. Thomas Keneally, Australians: Eureka to the Diggers (Sydney: Allen and
                   Unwin, 2011), 11.
              4. “Fainting by the Way,” Sydney Morning Herald, August 1, 1861, 3.
              5. “Reported Discovery of Burke and of his Companions,” Illawarra
                   Mercury, October 1, 1861, 4.
              6. “Verses. By Henry Kendall. (Unpublished.),” Athenaeum, September 27,
                   1862, 395.
              7. W. T. Stead, “To All English-Speaking Folk,” Review of Reviews 1, no. 1
                   (Jan. 1890): 19.
              8. W. T. Stead, “The Reviews Reviewed: The Indian World,” Review of
                   Reviews 32, no. 187 (1995): 83.
              Class
              DEBORAH EPSTEIN NORD
              I   N 1958 Raymond Williams offered five keywords for understanding the
                   last decades of the eighteenth century and first half of the nineteenth:
              class, industry, democracy, art, and culture.1 Though these are all obviously
              interrelated, the first three are deeply connected and, indeed, inseparable
              in a way that not only helps to demonstrate why “class” dominated analysis
              of the Victorian period in the past but also suggests why the term is crucial
              to grasping what the Victorians themselves were thinking about and zeal-
              ously trying to comprehend. Without industry, there was no industrial
              working class and no manufacturing class, the two segments of a new social
              order that most confounded observers and reformers. Without a rising
              working class, there would have been no Chartism and no 1832 Reform
              Bill, the first, if radically incomplete, step to representative democracy. If
              the term and its variants loomed large in the literature of the Victorian
              age and only slightly less large in the birth of Victorian Studies, the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:05, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000402

