                    640          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       3. Arthur Symons, “The Decadent Movement in Literature,” Harper’s
                            New Monthly Magazine 87 (June 1893): 858.
                       4. Paul Bourget, Essais de Psychologie Contemporaine (Paris: Lemerre,
                            1883), 25.
                       5. Susan Sontag, “Notes on Camp,” Partisan Review 31, no. 4 (1964):
                            515–30, 517.
                       6. Sontag, “Notes,” 516.
                       7. Symons, “The Decadent Movement,” 859.
                       8. Max Beerbohm, “A Letter to the Editor,” The Yellow Book 2 (July
                            1894): 284.
                       9. Sontag, “Notes,” 522.
                    10. This image appeared in Beardsley’s design for the title page of the
                            1894 Bodley Head edition of Salome. See Oscar Wilde, Salome
                            (London: Elkin Mathews & John Lane, 1894).
                    11. R. Murray Gilchrist, “The Crimson Weaver,” The Yellow Book 6 (July
                            1895): 270.
                    12. Sontag, “Notes,” 523.
                    Democracy
                    KENT PUCKETT
                    W          E have plenty of reasons to think about democracy just now. In ways
                               that would have seemed frankly unimaginable a year or two ago,
                    reference is being routinely made to the authoritarian and maybe inex-
                    orable decay of democratic norms in the otherwise staid opinion pages of
                    The New York Times, The Washington Post, and even USA Today. Just a month
                    ago, E. J. Dionne (neither an alarmist nor a revolutionary) wrote about
                    our Trumpian moment, “Democracies sometimes collapse suddenly.
                    More typically, they waste away.”1 Maybe more worrisome is the fact
                    that so many ordinary people seem already to have given up, seem,
                    regardless of party affiliation, to have taken up a casually, if corrosively,
                    skeptical attitude to elections that are the institutional basis of any
                    democracy. If one group appears to believe that elections are “rigged”
                    (fraudulent votes, stolen elections, hacked machines), the other seems
                    to think most other voters are too bigoted, ill-informed, or stupid to
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000451

                                                                                                        D E M OC R ACY              641
              weigh in on important political questions. Both beliefs call the very act of
              voting into question, a fact that threatens to undermine institutional
              norms that make representative democracy possible.
                      Rather, then, than think about democracy in the large and some-
              times fuzzy terms of an ethical ideal as opposed to a political norm, I
              want to look back to the Victorian period and to the Victorian novel in
              order to consider what we might take as democracy’s procedural or log-
              ical minimum: the individual vote. Representative democracy depends
              on formal assumptions about votes and voting that were on the minds
              of some eminent Victorians as they considered electoral reform in
              1832, 1867, 1872, 1884, and 1885. As Victorians argued about the
              more and less gradual expansion of the electorate, the nature of political
              representation, the costs and benefits of the secret ballot, and so on, they
              confronted essential questions about individual votes and whole elections
              as forms capable of representing preferences. Democracy, then and now,
              relies on a formal account both of the representational status of the sin-
              gle vote as an index of the individual’s social preference and of the way
              individual votes are taken in aggregate to produce second-order repre-
              sentations of the preference of a group. More than that, and as electoral
              theorists (from the Marquis de Condorcet and Lewis Carroll to Joseph
              Schumpeter and Kenneth Arrow) have long argued, every effort to
              design a logically coherent electoral system must confront certain neces-
              sary limits. I want to argue that Victorians not only had to work through
              some of the limits and paradoxes immanent to democratic procedure
              but also used literary form as a way, if not to think through, at least to
              highlight those limits and those paradoxes.
                      Take Middlemarch: although George Eliot’s novel is in some obvious
              sense about voting, the 1832 Reform Act, and its partial expansion of the
              franchise, it doesn’t attend to the details of voting and elections in the
              same way that some other Victorian novels do. That is, although we follow
              Will Ladislaw as he works to return Mr. Brooke to Parliament as a reform
              candidate for the town of Middlemarch, Brooke’s spectacularly tongue-
              tied failure on the hustings brings his campaign to an early end and
              pushes the details, the processes, the actual act of voting into the novel’s
              background. Seen in these terms, it would make more sense to look at
              several of Trollope’s novels, or to Our Mutual Friend, or even to Eliot’s
              other novel of 1832, Felix Holt, the Radical, in order to understand how
              Victorian voting actually worked.
                      That said, although it hasn’t the national consequence of a Reform
              Act, one fully represented election does appear in the novel. In the early
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000451

                    642          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    days of Lydgate’s association with the banker Bulstrode, he is called upon to
                    cast a vote for the new chaplain of the infirmary he oversees with Bulstrode,
                    Brooke, and other Middlemarch notables. The choice is between Lydgate’s
                    new friend, Mr. Farebrother, and Bulstrode’s man, Mr. Tyke. Although he
                    leans initially towards Tyke despite his regard for Farebrother, Lydgate hes-
                    itates, finding the decision less difficult than personally galling: “But which-
                    ever way Lydgate began to incline, there was something to make him wince;
                    and being a proud man, he was a little exasperated at being obliged to
                    wince.”2 The issue is less about the relative merits of the two candidates,
                    about whom Lydgate still knows little, than about how other people will
                    interpret his vote. In the end, he votes for Tyke out of neither conviction
                    nor convenience, but rather out of a kind of game-theoretical spite.
                            Coming last into the room, Lydgate has thus to cast the tie-breaking
                    vote. Before he does, the phlegmatic Wrench chides him:
                             “The thing is settled now,” said Mr. Wrench, rising. “We all know how
                             Mr. Lydgate will vote.”
                                   “You seem to speak with some peculiar meaning, sir,” said Lydgate,
                             rather defiantly, and keeping his pencil suspended.
                                   “I merely mean that you are expected to vote with Mr. Bulstrode. Do you
                             regard that meaning as offensive?”
                                   “It may be offensive to others. But I shall not desist from voting with him
                             on that account.”
                                   Lydgate immediately wrote down “Tyke.”3
                     Denying the good Farebrother a much-needed income, Lydgate’s vote
                    continues to make him wince: “The affair of the chaplaincy remained a
                    sore point in his memory as a case in which this petty medium of
                    Middlemarch had been too strong for him. How could a man be satisfied
                    with a decision between such alternatives and under such circumstances?
                    No more than he could be satisfied with his hat, which he has chosen
                    from among such shapes as the resources of the age offer him, wearing it
                    at best with a resignation which is chiefly supported by comparison.”4
                            What happens here? Eliot’s quick sartorial take feels weak insofar as
                    it attributes Lydgate’s consternation to the historically limited nature of
                    any and every choice. Because we must choose between only the options
                    that time and circumstance provide, no choice can be really objective or
                    free; and Lydgate, whose chief fault is his inflated sense of independence
                    from social and material constraint (what Eliot calls his “spots of com-
                    monness”), would chafe at the idea of choice as wholly conditioned by
                    historical contingency. This sketchy analysis, however consonant with
                    the novel’s larger sense of the limits of historical agency, doesn’t really
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000451

                                                                                                        D E M OC R ACY              643
              account for what’s odd about Lydgate’s vote. He doesn’t vote for
              Tyke simply because he has to vote for someone; he votes for him because
              he wants, in a moment of pique, to show Wrench and the others that he
              doesn’t care what they think. He votes against his inclination but not
              necessarily his interest in order assert his agency.
                      Lydgate’s wince-inducing vote is thus an example of problems essen-
              tial to the political representation of social preference. What part of
              Lydgate—his public preference, his personal interest, his claim to auton-
              omy, his amour propre—is in fact represented by his vote? Given Lydgate’s
              divided and avowedly irrational sense of what’s at stake, which person votes
              when Lydgate votes for Tyke over Farebrother? Lydgate’s problem is thus
              a nice instance of what Elaine Hadley takes as essential to debates that led
              up to Britain’s adoption of the secret ballot in 1872: “the persistence of
              personation as a topic of debate, and therefore its persistence as a ‘prob-
              lem’ for liberalism, suggests that the ballot unsuccessfully addresses a
              social alterity that once was and could be again the perilous or promising
              place of politics: as if the liberal citizen must always register in the possi-
              bility of personation his own representational inadequacy.”5 That is, in
              and around 1872, while Eliot was finishing Middlemarch, it was not clear
              that it was possible to represent oneself as a single and rational person
              in the form of a single vote. Arguing against the secret ballot in 1861,
              John Stuart Mill wrote that, “Though the community, as a whole, can
              have (as the terms imply) no other interest than its collective interest,
              any or every individual in it may. A man’s interest consists of whatever
              he takes an interest in. Every body has as many different interests as he
              has feelings; likings or dislikings, either of a selfish or of a better kind.”6
                      Eliot’s sense of the internally divided nature of Lydgate’s vote
              thus anticipates the economist Joseph Schumpeter’s skeptical account
              of “the classical theory of democracy” in Capitalism, Socialism, and
              Democracy (1942): “we still remain under the practical necessity of attrib-
              uting to the will of the individual an independence and a rational quality
              that are altogether unrealistic. If we are to argue that the will of the cit-
              izens per se is a political factor entitled to respect, it must first exist. That
              is to say, it must be something more than an indeterminate bundle of
              vague impulses loosely playing about given slogans and mistaken impres-
              sions.”7 In order for the individual vote to count and to be counted as a
              representation of a discrete social preference, we have to imagine the
              person as a bearer of individual and autonomous preferences; and,
              because his preference is an incoherent and ironic mix of public feeling,
              private interest, and personal pique, Lydgate cannot cast his vote as a
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000451

                    644          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    single representation of an already available and single preference: he
                    had not an opinion but rather “a vexed sense that he must make up
                    his mind.”8
                            For Schumpeter and other electoral theorists, the ambiguity of the
                    vote as form of representation leads to other, more systemic problems
                    stemming from what we might call the bad transitivity of the individual
                    vote. That is, when elections take several votes in aggregate as a represen-
                    tation of a group’s will, they assume individual votes as roughly equivalent
                    to one another. In order to say that 5 beats 4 (that 5 is somehow more
                    significant than 4), we must assign each of those votes an equal value.
                    How, though, do we assign a stable quantitative value to the shifting qual-
                    ity of Lydgate’s acknowledged perplexity? In electoral theory, these ques-
                    tions are often asked in terms of voter intensity and voter ignorance:
                    should elections take the intensity of a voter’s feelings into consideration?
                    If 5 voting against a proposal don’t much care, and 4 voting for a pro-
                    posal care passionately, should we say still that the 5 matter more? Is
                    the vote of someone who knows nothing about a given issue equivalent
                    to the vote of someone who knows everything? This core problem—dem-
                    ocratic elections must assume a transitive relation between votes that
                    votes cannot themselves formally support—is at the base of a number
                    of discrete technical paradoxes that can undermine elections:
                    Condorcet’s Paradox, the Winner-Turns-Loser Paradox, the No-Show
                    Paradox, the Multiple-Districts Paradox, and so on.9
                            Given time, we could look to other examples to see where some
                    Victorian writers used literary representation as a way to highlight and
                    to think through some of these paradoxes. We could look at how
                    Dickens and Trollope embed formal concerns about voter aggregation
                    not only in the elections they occasionally represent but also in different
                    theories of character that rely on the relation between major and minor,
                    the one and the many as relative modes of preferential intensity. We
                    could look, too, to William Morris’s brief account of voting in News
                    from Nowhere to see where his democratic socialist’s skepticism turns not
                    only on the affective limits of any given vote but also on an imagined
                    and anachronistic point of contact between a novelistic present, a uto-
                    pian future, and an imaginary and epic past. Or we could look to
                    Lewis Carroll’s effort aesthetically to encode and to transcend the precise
                    terms of Condorcet’s Paradox (an issue with which he grappled explicitly
                    in his electoral theory) in the Dodo’s Caucus Race in Alice’s Adventures in
                    Wonderland.10 The point, though, is not to resign either the Victorians or
                    ourselves to a corrosive skepticism about elections and democracy. It is
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000451

                                                                                                        D E M OC R ACY              645
              rather to see that these logical limits and paradoxes, troubling as they are,
              are not an excuse to give up but are rather the very reason to value, to
              defend, and continuously to improve some of the democratic institutions
              and norms we already possess. To see, as some Victorian novels help us to
              see, that elections and democracy are specifically and technically imperfect
              is, I think, to acknowledge an opportunity and a responsibility to make
              them better. And if that’s not a Victorian feeling, I don’t know what is.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. E. J. Dionne Jr., “Trump Is Faithfully Following the Autocrat’s
                     Playbook,” The Washington Post, November 1, 2017.
                2. George Eliot, Middlemarch (New York: W. W. Norton & Company,
                     2000), 115.
                3. Eliot, Middlemarch, 119.
                4. Eliot, Middlemarch, 119.
                5. Elaine Hadley, Living Liberalism: Practical Citizenship in Mid-Victorian
                     Britain (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010), 227–28.
                6. John Stuart Mill, Considerations on Representative Government
                     (Charleston: Bibliobazaar, 2007), 147 (emphasis original).
                7. Joseph A. Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy
                     (New York: Harper Perennial, 2008), 253.
                8. Eliot, Middlemarch, 114.
                9. See for example Christopher H. Achen and Larry M. Bartels,
                     Democracy for Realists: Why Elections Do Not Produce Responsive
                     Government (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016); Kenneth
                     Arrow, Social Choice and Individual Values (New Haven: Yale
                     University Press, 1963); Robert A. Dahl, A Preface to Democratic
                     Theory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006); Peter
                     C. Fishburn, “Paradoxes of Voting,” The American Political Science
                     Review, 68, No. 2 (1974): 537–546; Chantal Mouffe, The Democratic
                     Paradox (London: Verso, 2005); George G. Szpiro, Numbers Rule:
                     The Vexing Mathematics of Democracy, from Plato to the Present
                     (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010).
              10. See Kent Puckett, “Caucus-Racing,” NOVEL: A Forum on Fiction 47, no.
                     1 (2014): 11–23.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000451

