                    646          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Description
                    DAVID SWEENEY COOMBS
                    T       HE thick description developed by Gilbert Ryle and Clifford Geertz
                            that became the foundation of New Historicism was a method for
                    weaving a complex web of intention and meaning around a small kernel
                    of observation. More recently, literary critics have begun rejecting thick
                    description in favor of thin description—a method that strips away the
                    stuff of phenomenological fullness and interiority and defers interpretive
                    plenitude in order to better reveal the kernel of observed reality under-
                    neath. We might then speak of a New Description coming to displace the
                    New Historicism. The proponents of the New Description seek to remake
                    literary study on the model of the “exhaustive, fine-grained attention to
                    phenomena” developed by the more stringently empirical branches of
                    social science.1 Of course, fieldwork is rarely included in literary study.
                    Working at a remove from observation proper, descriptive critics there-
                    fore center their own fine-grained attention on descriptions in literary
                    texts—most typically, novels—that display a similarly painstaking atten-
                    tion to phenomena.2 For literary study now, description is thus both a
                    method and an object.
                            In key respects, the critical turn to the New Description is also a
                    return to questions and methods that emerged during the nineteenth
                    century. In the nineteenth century, as today, description was a transdisci-
                    plinary method, crossing multiple domains from natural history to the
                    novel. By aiming to bring reading as close as possible to observation,
                    the New Description in fact reanimates Victorian debates about where
                    to draw the boundary between verbal and empirical knowledge. The
                    increasing uncertainty surrounding that distinction in the nineteenth
                    century is signaled by the emergence (first appearing in John Grote’s
                    1865 Exploratio Philosophica) of two new epistemological categories: knowl-
                    edge by acquaintance, which we obtain through the direct presentation
                    of a thing to our senses; and knowledge by description (also called
                    “knowledge about”), which we obtain through a propositional account
                    of a thing. While the difference between acquaintance and description
                    seems fairly intuitive, these categories circulated widely in Victorian dis-
                    cussions of empiricism precisely because of productive disagreements
                    over whether they might distinguish not only between reading about
                    something and sensuously experiencing it but also between the different
                    parts of sense experience itself. William James’s Principles of Psychology
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000463

                                                                                                     D E S C R I P T I ON           647
              (1890) used description and acquaintance to distinguish between what
              psychologists saw as the two elements of experience, sensation and per-
              ception. The function of sensation, he writes, “is that of mere acquain-
              tance with a fact. Perception’s function, on the other hand, is
              knowledge about a fact.”3 Sensing a fact is becoming aware of simple qual-
              ities, like heat, resistance, or pain; the fact of mere acquaintance is
              stripped of all its relations, so utterly nude that it lacks a name (James
              calls it a that). The descriptive knowledge instantiated in perception,
              meanwhile, recognizes that fact’s relations to other facts that we have
              already or might in future become acquainted with and so ties them
              together into “the unity of a thing with a name.”4 The perceptible,
              James suggests, includes elements of intentionality and reference that
              reveal unexpected parallels between the direct observer and the descrip-
              tive literary critic.
                      While the New Description tends to be centered on novels, it thus
              participates in a broader intellectual history that played out across a
              range of Victorian institutions, observational and reading practices,
              and literary genres. The modern museum, for instance, develops in
              the nineteenth century as a space defined by the tension between
              acquaintance and description. Ruth Bernard Yeazell has recently
              shown how the picture titles now ubiquitous in galleries and museums
              evolved from the descriptions in catalogs, ledgers, and prints that allowed
              the gallery-going members of an emergent art-public to identify and
              keep track of what they were seeing.5 Description thus served as an indis-
              pensable aid to the democratization of art, but its supplemental necessity
              to the museum’s exhibition of objects also occasioned intractable debates
              about the nature of the instruction that museums are supposed to pro-
              vide. So, whereas William Stanley Jevons argued in 1883 that “the pur-
              pose of a true Museum is to enable the student to see the things and
              realize sensually the qualities described in lessons or lectures . . . [that]
              cannot be learnt by words” and proposed that displays should replace
              “the senseless verbal teaching” predominant in schools, George Brown
              Goode famously defined the museum only a few years later as “a collection
              of instructive labels, each illustrated by a well-selected specimen” and proposed
              that displays should be fitted out with descriptive labels, reference guides,
              and experts trained to give fuller descriptive details to curious specta-
              tors.6 The Victorian Aesthetic Movement, meanwhile, rejected the
              descriptive mediation of experts in the service of its own democratizing
              insistence on the primacy of direct sensuous encounters with art objects.
              “Is the meaning of a work of art,” Vernon Lee scoffed with representative
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000463

                    648          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    incredulity, “to depend on [the classical dictionaries of] Lempriere and
                    Dr. William Smith?”7 At the same time, aestheticism itself specialized in
                    descriptions. Those descriptions—perhaps best exemplified in Walter
                    Pater’s famous description of the Mona Lisa as a kind of vampire—were
                    often notoriously thick, so much so that Geertz holds up aestheticism as
                    the fate of any thick describer who loses touch with the “hard surfaces of
                    life.”8 But aestheticism included other descriptive models, such as the gal-
                    lery diaries in which Lee and her lover, Clementina Anstruther-Thomson,
                    recorded their physiological responses to art works. It was from these
                    descriptions that Lee developed a quantitative, minimally interpretive
                    method of literary criticism that one recent account identifies as the
                    unacknowledged progenitor of distant reading.9
                             Situating the New Description within this longer methodological his-
                    tory, I suggest, can help us reframe our approach to literature and sci-
                    ence. The groundbreaking work on Victorian literature and science by
                    literary scholars such as George Levine and Gillian Beer tracked the cir-
                    culation between writers and scientists of the ideas, tropes, and narratives
                    that make up, as Beer puts it, “the patterns through which we apprehend
                    experience and hence the patterns through which we condense experi-
                    ence in the telling of it.”10 Experience, here, is categorically distinct
                    from the language of its description—the patterns of narrative and dis-
                    course through which it is apprehended and recounted. In contrast,
                    the New Description, insofar as it conducts empirical analyses of textual
                    descriptions, strives to make the language of description itself into the
                    stuff of experience—an aim it shares with both aestheticism and
                    Jamesian empiricism. For us now as well as for the Victorians, reading
                    descriptively points towards a more robustly empirical account of how
                    we make the world perceptually present in reading, and thus of how
                    we make it real.
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. Heather Love, “Close Reading and Thin Description,” Public Culture
                            25, no. 3 (2013): 401–34, 404. See also Sharon Marcus, Stephen
                            Best, and Heather Love, “Building a Better Description,”
                            Representations 135, no. 1 (2016): 1–21.
                       2. Cannon Schmitt astutely signals this dynamic of descriptive redou-
                            bling when he reframes what György Lukács characterizes as the nov-
                            elist’s dilemma of whether to “Narrate or Describe” as a dilemma for
                            the novel-reading critic in “Interpret or Describe?” See Cannon
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000463

                                                                                   DESCRIPTION, DIALECT                             649
                     Schmitt, “Interpret or Describe?” Representations 135, no. 1 (2016):
                     102–18.
                3.   William James, The Principles of Psychology, Vol. 2 (New York: Dover,
                     1918), 2 (emphasis original).
                4.   James, Principles, 78 (emphasis original).
                5.   See Ruth Bernard Yeazell, Picture Titles: How and Why Western Paintings
                     Acquired Their Names (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2015),
                     19–139.
                6.   William Stanley Jevons, “The Use and Abuse of Museums,” in The
                     Emergence of the Modern Museum: an Anthology of Nineteenth-Century
                     Sources, ed. Jonah Siegel (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008),
                     290; and George Brown Goode, “The Museums of the Future,”
                     (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1891), 433 (emphasis
                     original).
                7.   Vernon Lee, Belcaro: Being Essays on Sundry Aesthetical Questions
                     (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1887), 58–59.
                8.   Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures (New York: Basic Books,
                     1973), 30.
                9.   See Benjamin Morgan, The Outward Mind: Materialist Aesthetics in
                     Victorian Science and Literature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
                     2017), 219–54.
              10.    Gillian Beer, Darwin’s Plots: Evolutionary Narrative in Darwin, George
                     Eliot, and Nineteenth-Century Fiction (Cambridge: Cambridge
                     University Press, 2009), 6.
              Dialect
              TARYN HAKALA
              A      T the weekly meeting of the Manchester Literary Club on December
                      14, 1874, president George Milner read his essay “The Dialect of
              Lancashire Considered as a Vehicle for Poetry.” In it, he argues that
              the Lancashire dialect is not only more appropriate than but also supe-
              rior to Standard English for use in poetry. In defending this position,
              Milner cites Alfred Tennyson’s use of Anglo-Saxon diction and
              Matthew Arnold’s assertion “about simplicity being the supreme style,”
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:41:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000463

