                    660          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Emotions
                    GRACE MOORE
                    W          E owe much of our present-day understanding of the emotions to
                               the Victorians and the remarkable self-scrutiny that they exercised
                    in seeking to understand the nature and source of emotions. The
                    Scottish philosopher, Alexander Bain, captures the dynamism of this
                    field of study when, in a preface to the second edition of his The
                    Emotions and the Will (1865), he notes that he has “recast” his chapter
                    on emotion, further commenting that “the deriving of emotion from sen-
                    sation, according to general laws of the mind, has rendered it possible to
                    define and classify the emotions more precisely.”1
                            Victorian emotions were as diverse and complicated as our own, and
                    as Rachel Ablow has helpfully remarked, “the emotions continued to
                    function as a central epistemological tool throughout the era,” defining
                    boundaries, justifying exclusions, accounting for taste, and driving
                    change.2 At times Victorian emotions can seem remote, a difference
                    that Jenny Hartley captures superbly when she discusses her students’
                    negative reactions to sentimental Dickensian prose and the transforma-
                    tive experience of reading the words aloud, as a Victorian reader
                    would have done.3 Words that seemed mawkish on the page became
                    vivid with feeling and offer important insights into how we might under-
                    stand what the emotions theorist Monique Scheer has termed “emotions
                    as practice.”4 Hartley’s example demonstrates that Victorian emotions
                    can be retrieved and understood, and that doing so can offer valuable
                    insights into the period’s literature, culture, and society. Furthermore,
                    we can deepen our understanding of the nineteenth-century emotional
                    landscape by seeking to understand emotional impulses that spurred the
                    Victorians to action.
                            One understudied aspect of Victorian emotional life is the society’s
                    affective attitudes towards a swiftly changing and expanding environ-
                    ment. Writing about environmental change is, whether we like it or
                    not, an emotional process, just as it was for the Victorians. Today, the
                    use of the word “environment” often signals concerns surrounding the
                    destruction of the natural world, extinction, and climate change,
                    although for the Victorians the term was more capacious, with its
                    usage extending to “surroundings” of any kind, rather than specifically
                    rural spaces. The Victorians were deeply aware of accelerating ecological
                    change, in terms of the impact of industrialism on the world around
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000505

                                                                                                           E MOTI O NS              661
              them, as well as through travel, which—as it became easier—opened up
              new and fascinating places to explore and inhabit.
                      Writing in 2011, John Parham, who has been a leading figure in
              Victorian ecocriticism, laid out four important reasons for studying
              Victorian ecology. Parham notes that while Romanticists have been
              quick to engage with the possibilities that ecocriticism revealed,
              Victorian scholars have been more hesitant.5 His four categories encom-
              pass scientific developments of the period, relations between humans
              and non-human others, Victorian political economy’s impact on the envi-
              ronment (including the rise of activism and “green politics” at the end of
              the nineteenth century), along with a need to examine the alarm and
              bewilderment accompanying the extraordinary number of ecological
              changes. As Parham expresses it, “the utility of ‘Victorian ecology’ resides
              in considering the multiplicity of ways—effective or otherwise—in which
              Victorian literary figures negotiated these dichotomies and, in turn, the
              complexity intrinsic to ecological thought.”6
                      Implicitly intertwined with each of Parham’s categories is the issue
              of emotion. The Victorians experienced strongly affective responses to
              environments, whether through their wonder as they learned of the dif-
              ference of Britain’s expanding colonial holdings, or through the misery
              caused by the pollution and urban overcrowding that were byproducts of
              industrialism. Philip Steer has convincingly argued for reading industrial
              novels as climate change works, and his assertion of the “strange and
              troubled kind of intimacy between our own moment of climate change
              and nineteenth-century Britain” reveals some of the affective connec-
              tions experienced by critical readers who see parallels between our pre-
              sent moment of ecological catastrophe, and the varied forms of climatic
              alteration experienced by the Victorians.7
                      Alexa Weik von Mossner has helpfully characterized affective reac-
              tions to the environment as a type of twofold embodiment. She asserts
              provocatively that, “our minds are both embodied (in a physical body)
              and embedded (in a physical environment), not only when we interact
              with the real world but also in our engagement with imaginary worlds.”8
              We might extend her parameters a little further to think about trans-
              historical comparisons, connecting our present ecological dilemma to
              that of the past, while attempting to remain conscious of our cultural,
              temporal, and physical embeddedness.
                      To engage with Victorian emotions surrounding the environment is
              for some a quest to locate and understand a potential beginning point for
              the Anthropocene.9 Through examining a text like Anthony Trollope’s
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000505

                    662          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    two-volume travelogue, Australia and New Zealand (1873), we not only begin
                    to see Trollope’s own conflicting emotions when faced with the vastness and
                    difference of Australia (and his reactions range from awe at its natural
                    resources to contempt for what he perceives as the docility of its native wild-
                    life), the author also provides us with an often unwitting first-hand account of
                    the deleterious effects of northern hemisphere ventures like pastoralization.
                    He charts the damage caused by deforestation (a subject he revisits with some
                    passion in his 1874 novella, Harry Heathcote of Gangoil), while also demonstrat-
                    ing the destructive impact of importing European livestock to the colony.
                    There are many places within the travelogue where Trollope carefully ana-
                    lyzes his own emotional state.10 But it is also interesting to consider the
                    role of hindsight in informing readerly affects provoked by the work.
                            One of the heartbreaking aspects of working on the Victorian envi-
                    ronment is to see how little has changed since the nineteenth century, as
                    the need for sustainability competes with the idea of the world as a
                    “resource” ripe for plunder. We might look to the fog pervading
                    Dickens’s Bleak House (1852–53) or the “unparliamentary” smoke of
                    Gaskell’s North and South (1853) for early representations of pollution,
                    while the ivory trade depicted by Conrad in Heart of Darkness reminds
                    us of an ongoing conservation battle that has yet to be won.11 A further
                    striking example of the type of cross-temporal affect that I seek to outline
                    may be found in Trollope’s novel, John Caldigate (1879), when the narra-
                    tor describes the vandalism of the gold-mining industry, highlighting the
                    carelessness with which those in pursuit of wealth take what they need
                    from the ground and move on:
                             They had walked about half a mile from the town, turning down a lane at the
                             back of the house, and had made their way through yawning pit-holes and
                             heaps of dirt and pools of yellow water,—where everything was disorderly
                             and apparently deserted,—till they came to a cluster of heaps so large as
                             to look like little hills; and here there were signs of mining vitality. On
                             their way they had not come across a single shred of vegetation, though
                             here and there stood the bare trunks of a few dead and headless trees,
                             the ghosts of the forest which had occupied the place six or seven years
                             previously.12
                     The narrator’s tone makes apparent Trollope’s dismay at the damage
                    caused by the miners. With its craters, dirt, and stagnant water, the
                    scene is a desolate waste land that is almost post-apocalyptic. While
                    Trollope may not couch his critique in ecological terms, it is clear that
                    his narrator is aghast and ashamed at the damage, and how quickly
                    European settlers have wreaked devastation upon their adopted home.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000505

                                                                                                           E MOTI O NS              663
                      I am struck by how similar Trollope’s description is to contemporary
              accounts of the laying to waste of landscapes by today’s mining corpora-
              tions.13 My Anthropocenic embeddedness makes reading this and many
              other Victorian environmental accounts a deeply visceral experience,
              and demonstrates how an emotion- or affect-driven methodology can illu-
              minate apparently familiar literary and historical texts.14 It therefore
              seems an obvious next step for Victorian scholars to inflect our ecocritical
              work with affect and emotions theory, which will enable important
              insights into the fear, uncertainty, and trauma characterizing environ-
              mental change then and now. Yet there are many other threads of
              Victorian studies that stand to benefit from an emotion- or affect-based
              methodology, which sheds light on the intensity of Victorian feelings
              and how they became the spurs to so many different forms of action.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. Alexander Bain, The Emotions and the Will (1859; London: Longmans,
                     Green & Co. 1865), vi.
                2. Rachel Ablow, “Introduction: Victorian Emotions,” Victorian Studies
                     50, no. 3 (2008): 375–77, 375.
                3. Jenny Hartley, “Nineteenth-Century Reading Groups in Britain and
                     the Community of the Text: An Experiment with Little Dorrit,” in
                     Reading Communities from Salons to Cyberspace, ed. De Nel Rehberg
                     Sedo (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2011): 44–59, 52.
                4. Monique Scheer, “Are Emotions a Kind of Practice (and is this
                     what makes them have a history)? A Bourdieuian Approach to
                     Understanding Emotion,” in History and Theory 51 (2012): 193–220.
                5. Publications in the field that postdate Parham’s important reflections
                     include: Dewey W. Hall, ed., Victorian Ecocriticism: The Politics of Place
                     and Early Environmental Justice (Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield,
                     2017); Laurence W. Mazzeno and Ronald Morrison, Victorian
                     Writers and the Environment: Ecocritical Perspectives (New York:
                     Routledge, 2016); Wendy Parkins, ed., Victorian Sustainability in
                     Literature and Culture (New York: Routledge, 2017); along with
                     many excellent articles on a variety of aspects of Victorian environ-
                     mentalism, as exemplified by Benjamin Morgan’s incisive work on
                     the intersections between science and climate change (see, for
                     instance, Benjamin Morgan, “Fin du Globe: On Decadent Planets,”
                     Victorian Studies 58, no. 4 [2016]: 609–35).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000505

                    664          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       6. John Parham, “Editorial,” in Green Letters: Studies in Ecocriticism, spe-
                            cial issue, “Victorian Ecology,” 14, no. 1 (2011): 5–9, 5–6.
                       7. Philip Steer, “Reading Classic Novels in an Era of Climate Change,”
                            in The Conversation, May 23, 2017, https://theconversation.com/read-
                            ing-classic-novels-in-an-era-of-climate-change-75843.
                       8. See Alexa Weik von Mossner, Affective Ecologies: Empathy, Emotion, and
                            Environmental Narrative (Athens: Ohio State University Press, 2017).
                       9. The onset of the Anthropocene, the epoch of human-engineered
                            environmental change, is contested, with some dating it to the inven-
                            tion of the steam engine, others situating it in the early 1800s, and
                            still others identifying its origins with the Victorians.
                    10. See Grace Moore, “So Wild and Beautiful a World Around Him:
                            Anthony Trollope and Antipodean Ecology,” in The Routledge Research
                            Companion to Anthony Trollope, ed. Margaret Markwick, Deborah
                            Denenholz Morse, and Mark Turner. (New York: Routledge, 2016)
                            and Grace Moore, “‘Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Reptiles’: Anthony
                            Trollope and the Australian Acclimatization Debate,” in Animals in
                            Victorian Literature and Culture, ed. L. W. Mazzeno and R. Morrison
                            (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2017) for two more detailed accounts of
                            Trollope’s emotional engagement with the Antipodes.
                    11. As I write, U. S. president Donald Trump seeks to reverse his
                            country’s ban on importing ivory products, a move which will endan-
                            ger the world’s already vulnerable elephant population.
                    12. Anthony Trollope, John Caldigate (1879; London: Dodo Press, n. d.), 74.
                    13. Raymond Williams writes of both mining communities and the envi-
                            ronmental impact of coal mining in The Country and the City (1973), a
                            work which is now considered to be a foundational text for ecocriti-
                            cism, while ecological scholars including Joni Adamson and Pamela
                            Banting have explored mining in their work. Philip Steer has written
                            on Trollope and the gold rush, albeit from an economic perspective,
                            in “Gold and Greater Britain: Jevons, Trollope, and Settler
                            Colonialism,” Victorian Studies 58, no. 3 (2016): 436–63.
                    14. Elspeth Probyn in “Shame in the Habitus” discusses uneasy land-
                            scapes, elegantly demonstrating how layers of historical guilt and
                            shame can combine with a visceral response to colonized and decol-
                            onized spaces to create an affective state of complete overwhelmed-
                            ness. See Probyn, “Shame in the Habitus,” Sociological Review 52,
                            no. 2 (2004): 224–48.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000505

                                                                                          E M OTI O N S , EM P I R E                665
              I gratefully acknowledge the support of the Australian Research Council
              (Project CE110001011) and the Centre of Excellence for the History of
              Emotions.
              Empire
              RYAN D. FONG
              S     INCE the rise of postcolonial theory and criticism in the 1980s, it has
                     become commonplace within Victorian studies to understand empire
              as a necessary category of analysis. In drawing on the pathbreaking
              analyses of critics like Edward Said and Gayatri Spivak, our field has
              long recognized how imperialism and colonialism functioned as crucial
              backdrops to the literary and cultural output of nineteenth-century
              Britain. At the same time, much of the current scholarship on empire
              and Victorian literature has still, in practice, tended to replicate imperial
              priorities and the spatial logic of settler colonialism. Frequently in this
              work, Britain remains the assumed center, as texts published within or
              about the metropole occupy an assumed-privileged status. Often building
              upon Said’s influential method of “contrapuntal reading,” these analyses
              construct important arguments about empire that nonetheless remain
              grounded in a relatively limited range of sources. Thus, in Elaine
              Freedgood’s The Ideas in Things, for instance, empire reveals itself in
              the imperial things that appear in Brontë and Dickens.1 Or in Nathan
              Hensley’s Forms of Empire, he shows us how several British texts encode
              the foundational terms of sovereignty and violence within their aesthetic
              structures.2 Moreover, even when scholars have looked further afield and
              beyond the British Isles themselves, such as in Hensley’s chapter on
              Haggard or in Jason Rudy’s wide-ranging Imagined Homelands, white emi-
              grant or colonial writers frequently remain at the forefront, which leaves
              many issues and subjects in the margins even as they undertake the
              important work of recuperating authors and texts from understudied
              archives.3
                      Each of these books makes necessary interventions in our field, and
              their incisive and imaginative analyses have enriched our discussions of
              empire enormously. Nevertheless, their contributions mainly lie in how
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000505

