                    672          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    8. Lauren M. E. Goodlad, The Victorian Geopolitical Aesthetic: Realism,
                          Sovereignty, and Transnational Experience (Oxford: Oxford University
                          Press, 2015).
                    9. Leela Gandhi, Affective Communities: Anticolonial Thought, Fin-De-Siècle
                          Radicalism, and the Politics of Friendship (Durham: Duke University
                          Press, 2006); Tanya Agathocleous, “‘The Coming Clash of East and
                          West’: Syncretism, Cosmopolitanism, and Disaffection in the
                          Colonial Public Sphere,” Textual Practice 31, no. 4 (2017): 661–85;
                          Nancy Henry, George Eliot and the British Empire (Cambridge:
                          Cambridge University Press, 2006); and Deirdre David, Rule
                          Britannia: Women, Empire, and Victorian Writing (Ithaca: Cornell
                          University Press, 1995).
                    Enclosure
                    ZACH FRUIT
                    F      ROM the right angle, land enclosure takes on the aspect of the root
                           of capitalist accumulation. Marx, while suspicious of origin stories,
                    famously identifies land enclosure, and the nascent statist tactics of “con-
                    quest, enslavement, robbery, murder, in short, force” that accompany
                    it, as the “original sin” of “so-called primitive accumulation.”1 Many his-
                    torians have identified British land enclosure as a crucial aspect of
                    the eighteenth-century rise of industrial capitalism, while differently the-
                    orizing the relationship between the productive dynamics of English agri-
                    culture and the multinational circulation of capital.2 J. M. Neeson has
                    given the most textured account of the enclosure of the commons as a
                    decentralized process of expropriation that occasioned a complex array
                    of resistance, ambivalence, and compromise.3 The agricultural “improve-
                    ments” that accompanied enclosure also seem to be imbricated in the
                    enforced migration of agricultural laborers into urban centers and the
                    increasing rate of mechanization that led to the industrial revolution.4
                    Perhaps undertheorized, however, are the visual and aesthetic effects
                    of enclosure, and the innovative literary methodologies that metabolized
                    and disrupted these material transformations. Approaching enclosure as
                    an aesthetic phenomenon rather than an economic process allows for a
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000530

                                                                                                        ENCLOSURE                   673
              more supple account of the articulation between local English histories
              and their echoes across the stage of Empire.
                      The reign of Queen Victoria may seem a strange period in which to
              locate an analysis of enclosure. The majority of the land consumed by the
              informal process of “piecemeal enclosure” was accomplished during the
              eighteenth century, and the most significant parliamentary contribution
              to legal forms was authorized by the Inclosure Act of 1773. By the mid-
              nineteenth century, the process of English enclosure had largely come
              to a close. Neeson argues that “most commoning economies were extin-
              guished by enclosure at some point between the fifteenth and the nine-
              teenth centuries. The pace of this change was uneven. Much of England
              was still open in 1700; but most of it was enclosed by 1840.”5 While think-
              ers of the eighteenth century produced a diverse range of anti-enclosure
              writing, it was the Victorians who inherited the landscaped world of an
              enclosed England. Not only did enclosure reinforce particular modes
              of engaging the land as an aesthetic object, its logics of expropriation
              and counterinsurgency mutated and calcified into the increasingly insti-
              tutional apparatus of British imperialism.6
                      Literature of the nineteenth century makes the history of land enclo-
              sure visible through descriptions of landscape that have come to be
              understood as genre conventions. From the idealizing traditions of the
              country house poem and its transmutations into the experiments of Jane
              Austen’s novels, to the geographical fantasia of Alfred Tennyson’s
              In Memoriam, the ordering and control of landscapes is an unavoidable
              trope of the Victorian text. Characteristic passages from realist novels are
              oriented around the vistas of the prospect poem, and emphasize the anti-
              nomic pleasure of taxonomizing traits of a landscape that combine to
              exceed the limits of vision. These passages are difficult to constellate in
              a short paper because they are characteristically lengthy. Most readers
              will be familiar with passages like Margaret Hale’s sighs for the “old pictur-
              esqueness” of Helstone’s “grassy wayside”;7 the nostalgic description of the
              hills around Hayslope Green in Adam Bede in which the motion of sheep
              are “revealed by memory”;8 the fading “little prettinesses” of the Carbury
              Estate in The Way We Live Now;9 and the “peculiarly English picture” of
              Gardencourt that opens Portrait of a Lady.10 The energies that motivate
              these descriptions range widely: Gaskell’s comparison amplifies the dis-
              juncture between agricultural stagnancy and industrial progress; Eliot’s
              Wordsworthian paean affirms the relationship between memory and eth-
              ics; Trollope disparages the economic instability of the luxury estate; and
              James orchestrates a magisterial psychological theory of self-cultivation.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000530

                    674          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    All, however, rely on the history of enclosure as the historico-material pro-
                    cess by which these landscapes became available. Further, enclosure sus-
                    tains a symbolic resonance through which the critique, nostalgia, satire,
                    and self-consciousness of these passages are enabled. Margaret Hale
                    mourns the changes of a “trimmed and narrowed road” whose “green
                    straggling pathway” has been “enclosed and cultivated.”11 The woods
                    that Eliot describes as “divided by bright patches of pasture or furrowed
                    crops” are figuratively “hurried together” so that they “might take better
                    care of the tall mansion” which derives its material support from the
                    very pastoral enclosures which surround it.12 Trollope explicitly states
                    that the “prettiness” of Roger Carbury’s lifestyle is predicated on the raised
                    rents and extended acreage afforded by the “enclosure of the com-
                    mons.”13 James tells his readers that Mr. Touchett would have “been
                    delighted to tell you” the history of the land around his house which, fol-
                    lowing the Restoration, had been “much repaired and enlarged,” then
                    “remodelled and disfigured,” and finally incorporated into a “real aesthetic
                    passion” that is inextricable from the history of its dishonorable owner-
                    ship.14 These passages submerge history in environment; the raw wounds
                    of centuries of enclosure softened by the twin imperatives of the natural
                    world: growth and decay.
                            Of course, there is a related structure that is also powered by the dia-
                    lectical exchange between growth and decay. Capitalism is a system in
                    which the decay of land, labor, and material are transformed into
                    increasingly accumulated wealth. Marx concludes Capital, Volume 1 with
                    successive chapters on enclosure, the genesis of the capitalist farmer,
                    the agricultural revolution, and finally the mechanics of colonization.
                    The organization of this conclusion emphasizes the concomitance of
                    rural English market development and colonial expansion. I want to
                    speculate that the aesthetic manifestations of pastoral English history
                    that I have gestured to in this essay can be analyzed as sites from which
                    the linkages between the local and global mechanics of capital erupt.
                    The slow legalization of the expropriation occasioned by enclosure is a
                    fundamental metaphor for the mechanism of capitalist alienation.
                    Without evacuating historical specificity, close attention to the texture
                    of these local traces of enclosure focuses analytical accounts on the
                    dynamic of capitalist expansion. Using the history of enclosure as a sup-
                    plement to descriptions of landscape in nineteenth-century literature
                    offers ways of understanding historical material that is constantly subject
                    to the dual energies of both the natural world and the capitalist world-
                    system. To better understand the coincidences and tensions between
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000530

                                                                                                        ENCLOSURE                   675
              these two dynamic states of being and the discourses in which they can be
              represented is to have a better language with which to describe our cur-
              rent environmentally compromised world.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. 1 (New York: Penguin, 1990), 874.
                2. I am thinking here of Giovanni Arrighi, Eric Hobsbawm, and
                     Immanuel Wallerstein. Andre Gunder Frank and Maxine Berg
                     offer crucial correctives to the Eurocentrism of these historical
                     accounts, which tend to exceptionalize the European development
                     of capitalism in a world economic context largely impervious and
                     oblivious to English Industrial Revolution.
                3. J. M. Neeson, Commoners: Common Right, Enclosure and Social Change in
                     England, 1700–1820 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
                4. Neeson’s account of the process enclosure emphasizes the ambiva-
                     lence and diversity of responses to agricultural improvement. She
                     argues that historical accounts of the process have mistakenly pre-
                     sumed that there was a distinctly positive impact of the “efficiency”
                     of agricultural techniques, when in fact many of the changes seem
                     to have had a neutral or negative effect.
                5. Neeson, Commoners, 5.
                6. The transition of the informal rule of the East India Company to the
                     direct rule of British Parliament following the Government of India
                     Act of 1858 can be understood in a metonymic relation to the tran-
                     sition from informal piecemeal enclosure to the Parliamentary inter-
                     vention of the Inclosure Act.
                7. Elizabeth Gaskell, North and South (New York: Oxford University
                     Press, 1998), 356.
                8. George Eliot, Adam Bede (New York: Penguin, 2008), 17.
                9. Anthony Trollope, The Way We Live Now (New York: Penguin, 1994),
                     44.
              10. Henry James, The Portrait of a Lady (New York: Penguin, 2011), 1.
              11. Gaskell, North and South, 356.
              12. Eliot, Adam Bede, 17.
              13. Trollope, The Way We Live Now, 44.
              14. James, Portrait, 2.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000530

