                    676          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Environment
                    NATHAN K. HENSLEY
                    H         AS there ever been something called the environment? And if
                               so, what was it—before we destroyed it? Or again, and the
                    reverse: when did the environment come into being? While the term,
                    derived from the middle French “to surround,” dates in English to the
                    seventeenth century, gaining force in the eighteenth, one version of
                    our commonsensical notion of environment—as the physical milieu for
                    biotic life—is definitively Victorian. The Oxford English Dictionary gives
                    its birth year as 1855, and attributes it to Herbert Spencer.1 It was not
                    until 1912 that Thomas Hardy would re-outfit his novelistic oeuvre by
                    classifying some as “Novels of Character and Environment.” Yet in
                    Hardy’s Wessex Edition nomenclature, the term stands to mean not a
                    ontologically complete or total nonhuman world, “the environment,”
                    but the variable milieus—Flintcomb Ash, the Vale of Froom—that enable
                    and constrain the human actors attempting to flourish in those particular
                    zones. This pluralized notion of “environment” is the crystal of what
                    Elizabeth Miller calls Hardy’s “bioregional” project, and helped Hardy
                    imagine how an organism like Tess Durbeyfield might or might not fit
                    with a given ecosystem.2 Hardy’s commitment to documenting the rela-
                    tion between organism and milieu takes shape, in Miller’s words, as a
                    “dialectical approach to human characters, the environment in which
                    they live, and the complex, reciprocal relation between them,” and is
                    generated from a post-Darwinian sense of human beings’ entanglement
                    with forces and entities beyond themselves.3
                            Hardy’s work was to document the collapse of liberalism’s fictions of
                    autonomy under the pressure of evolutionary thought. But the notion of
                    environment as a relatively fixed local milieu that determines human
                    action is also what Annales School historian Fernand Braudel had in
                    mind when, in the first section The Mediterranean (1949, 1966), he
                    referred to “The Role of the Environment” in the social history of that
                    region. For Braudel, environment names the “constant repetition, ever-
                    recurring cycles” of nonhuman activity, where change is slow or absent
                    and history is “almost timeless.”4 “The mountains,” he says, “resist the
                    march of history . . . or they accept it only with reluctance.”5 Braudel’s envi-
                    ronment is a static or nearly static local backdrop, in dialogue with which
                    human history might coevolve, but which human action cannot substan-
                    tively change—a formulation that has cognates in the novelistic concept
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000542

                                                                                                   E NV I RO NM E N T               677
              of “setting.” In this sense as an unchanging mise en scène, environment exists
              in tension with ecology, another Victorian term, which denotes a more
              robustly interactive collaboration among factors or agents in a system. As
              Vin Nardizzi has noted, thinkers like Michel Serres in the 1990s began to
              critique “environment” for its crypto-anthropocentrism and called on phi-
              losophy to “forget the word environment in this context.”6 While working on
              Tess, Hardy himself gothically pointed to lack of reciprocal interaction
              between foreground and background in his model, when he recorded feel-
              ing “as if I were a spectre not solid enough to influence my environment.”7
                      Whatever his existential dilemma, Hardy refers here to my environ-
              ment, not the environment. That latter usage, “[f]requently with the,”
              the OED says, understands the environment as singular abstraction or
              ecological totality: “[t]he natural world or physical surroundings in gene-
              ral.”8 This world-scaled abstraction was unavailable to Hardy in 1888 and
              even 1912, and arrives, we are told, only in the postwar moment, smack at
              the center of the period of vertiginous “growth” and rapidly gathering
              ecological catastrophe that environmental historians call the Great
              Acceleration: in 1948, the year of my parents’ birth.9 Where did this envi-
              ronment come from? Timothy Mitchell argues that the interlinked disas-
              ters driven by the twentieth century’s petroleum economy succeeded a
              Victorian scenario by which coal was extracted, distributed, and inciner-
              ated along networks connecting major cities by rail. By the 1970s, these
              Victorian practices of accumulation—fixed to physical limits, bound by
              established lines of connection—came to seem quaint against an emer-
              gent economic logic whereby petroleum traveled by tanker along vari-
              able routes, and in which the concept of growth itself had become
              unmoored from “spatial and material processes that had physical limits.”
              Instead, growth came to be conceived in relation to a new and theoreti-
              cally limitless abstraction: “the economy.”10 Mitchell shows how, for rea-
              sons too complex to detail here, this notion of “the economy” as a closed
              totality of monetary circulation generated countermovements, political
              and economic both, that culminated in the “production of the environ-
              ment as a rival object of politics.”11 In this telling, “the environment” owes its
              roots to specific antagonisms over labor, capital, and energy access in the
              crisis period of early neoliberalism: it was a new abstraction vast enough
              to leverage against “the economy.” Baby boomers, caught as they were in
              the whirlwind of the Great Acceleration’s money economy—which was,
              we might note, also the moment that established Victorian Studies as a
              discipline—thus succeeded in solidifying a notion of environment coex-
              tensive with something like “earth” or “nature” conceived as total system.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000542

                    678          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Like the first Earth Day, the Environmental Protection Agency dates from
                    1970, when it was proposed as an entity able to manage items of legislation,
                    like the Clean Air Act (1970) and the Clean Water Act (1972), directed at
                    more particular earth systems. And as the Great Acceleration accelerated,
                    so too did this newly abstract environment: Google’s NGram shows the
                    sharpest spike for “the environment” between 1960 and 1975, after
                    which point the definite-articled term levels off until the mid-1980s,
                    when it shoots skyward again.
                            Published at the height of this new burst in 1983, Gillian Beer’s mas-
                    terful evaluation of Darwinian thought bears a snapshot of environ-
                    ment’s conceptual history in its syntax. In Darwin’s Plots, Beer
                    summarized natural selection by noting that “the fitness of an individual
                    to its environment” depended on a sense (contra Hardy) that “the environ-
                    ment is not monolithic or stable.”12 She continued: “we tend to think of
                    the individual organism as dynamic and the environment as static—but
                    the environment, being composed of so many more varied needs than
                    the individual, is prone to unforeseeable and uncontrollable changes.”13
                            Varied and changeful as it is here represented to be, “the environ-
                    ment” nevertheless receives the definite article: it is a container into
                    which so many other local milieus might be subsumed. Beer’s hesitation
                    between “its” and “the” environment thus fixes into uneasy totality what
                    the sentence argues to be plural and endlessly variable. This tension crys-
                    tallizes the mismatch between, on the one hand, the argot of post-1970s
                    environmental thought informing Beer’s 1983 intervention and, on the
                    other, the more plastic or pluralized dance between milieu and instance,
                    background and foreground, animate “organism” and questionably
                    animate milieu, that Charles Darwin himself had always imagined as
                    “entangle[ment].” The twist is that the term “environment” appears
                    not a single time in On the Origin of Species itself. Instead Darwin uses a
                    plural term, “conditions,” which appears endlessly, and in multiple
                    forms: as “surrounding conditions,” “physical conditions,” “conditions
                    for . . . propagation,” and (most commonly) “conditions of life.”14
                            To recover this definitional question as a problem for Victorian
                    form, we might turn finally to Dickens, who in Our Mutual Friend
                    (1865) translates into narrative opportunity the very conceptual difficul-
                    ties in “environment” charted so far. That gothic study of systems and
                    entropy folds its human and nonhuman worlds together only to prise
                    them back apart, and vice versa. This interchange between foreground
                    and background confirms Bruno Latour’s insight that what he calls the
                    work of purification, which establishes the living world of human culture
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000542

                                                                                                   E NV I RO NM E N T               679
              and the inert or mechanistic domain of nonhuman nature as “entirely
              discrete ontological zones,” comes hand in hand with “work of transla-
              tion,” which “creates mixtures between entirely new types of beings,
              hybrids between nature and culture.”15 Articulated skeletons, animate
              dolls, heaps of dust, dead bodies dragged from the river: in all these
              tropes and more, the novel crystallizes the play between the categories
              of thing and person, environment and character, nature and culture, a
              drama that plays out, as in Beer, at the level of syntax: here, the personal
              pronoun. Dead bodies, nearly obsessively, are denied it, and thus find
              themselves separated across a semantic divide from the world of the
              human characters who might participate in the sentimental melodrama
              of this marriage plot. “It was insensible,” notes Lizzie of her future hus-
              band Eugene Wrayburn, now floating as part of her environment in
              the Thames, “if not virtually dead; it was mutilated, and streaked the
              water all about it with dark red streaks. As it could not help itself, it
              was impossible for her to get it on board.”16 But in Dickens’s heteronor-
              mative economy of redemption, it must be redeemed into he, and this
              appalling object does become human again. In charting this recuperative
              motion Dickens ratifies the humanism Latour calls “modern” thinking,
              but in so doing also names as problematic the very dilemma the term
              “environment” likewise identifies. I am referring to the transitional
              space between milieu and character, a variable line that both separates
              and connects the world of objects from the world of (human) subjects.
              In this sense Dickens’ experiment might spur us to convert our questions
              about “Victorian literature and the environment” into other, nimbler
              conceptual pairings: Victorian Cultures of Nature, say, or Nonhuman
              Victorians, or even, to channel Dickens and Darwin, The Conditions of
              (Victorian) Life.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. “environment, n.,” OED Online, Oxford University Press, http://
                     www.oed.com.
                2. Elizabeth Carolyn Miller, “Dendrography and Ecological Realism,”
                     Victorian Studies 5, no. 4 (2016): 696–718, 699.
                3. Miller, “Dendrography,” 698.
                4. Fernand Braudel, The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in
                     the Age of Philip II, Vol. 1, trans. Sian Reynolds (New York: Harper,
                     1972), 20.
                5. Braudel, The Mediterranean, 41.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000542

                    680          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       6. Michel Serres, The Natural Contract, trans. Elizabeth MacArthur and
                            William Paulson (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2003);
                            quoted in Vin Nardizzi, “What is ‘Environment’?,” lecture delivered
                            at Georgetown University, April 8, 2017.
                       7. Robert Gittings, Thomas Hardy’s Later Years. In Young Thomas Hardy
                            and Thomas Hardy’s Later Years (New York: Book of the Month,
                            1990), 59.
                       8. “environment, n.,” OED Online, Oxford University Press, http://
                            www.oed.com.
                       9. “Within the last three human generations, three-quarters of the
                            human-caused loading of the atmosphere with carbon dioxide took
                            place. The number of motor vehicles on Earth increased from 40 mil-
                            lion to 850 million. The number of people nearly tripled, and the
                            number of city dwellers rose from above 700 million to 3.7 billion.
                            In 1950 the world produced about 1 million tons of plastics but by
                            2015 that rose to nearly 300 million tons. In the same time span,
                            the quantities of nitrogen synthesized (mainly for fertilizer) climbed
                            from under 4 million tons to more than 85 million tons. . . . The
                            entire life experience of almost everyone now living has taken place
                            within the eccentric historical moment of the Great Acceleration”
                            (Peter Engelke and J. R. McNeill, The Great Acceleration: An
                            Environmental History of the Anthropocene since 1945 [Cambridge:
                            Belknap Press, 2016], 4–5).
                    10. Timothy Mitchell, Carbon Democracy: Political Power in the Age of Oil
                            (New York: Verso, 2012), 169.
                    11. Mitchell, Carbon Democracy, 170–171 (emphasis added).
                    12. Gillian Beer, Darwin’s Plots: Evolutionary Narrative in Darwin, George Eliot,
                            and Nineteenth-Century Fiction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
                            2009), 18 (emphasis added).
                    13. Beer, Darwin’s Plots, 18 (emphasis added).
                    14. Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection; or the
                            Preservation of Favoured Races In The Struggle For Life, 6th ed. (Project
                            Gutenberg, 1859): https://www.gutenberg.org/files/2009/2009-h/
                            2009-h.htm. Devin Griffiths explains how Darwin imagined “a
                            world of nonhuman intent and distributed sentience” that “effec-
                            tively flattened the natural world, diffusing intentionality as an emer-
                            gent property shared throughout nature” (Devin Griffiths, The Age of
                            Analogy: Literature and Science Between the Darwins [Baltimore: Johns
                            Hopkins University Press, 2016], 238).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000542

                                                                                                   E NV I RO NM E N T               681
              15. Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern, trans. Catherine Porter
                     (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 10.
              16. Charles Dickens, Our Mutual Friend (New York: Penguin, 1998),
                     683–84.
              Environment
              ALLEN MACDUFFIE
              T      HE story of the coinage and popularization of the word environment
                     in its modern sense runs through some of the towering intellectual
              figures of the Victorian period—Thomas Carlyle, Harriet Martineau, G.
              H. Lewes, and Herbert Spencer—and their continental influences,
              Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Auguste Comte. In some ways, it is a
              story that bears directly upon the wholesale rethinking of the conven-
              tional divide between nature and culture that went on in many disci-
              plines over the course of the century, a conceptual shift that has roots
              in German and British Romantic thought, and finds scientific theoriza-
              tion in the work of Charles Darwin. But it’s also a story about the compli-
              cations and difficulties involved in reimagining the relationship between
              these two crucial categories, and the way racial, imperial, and economic
              ideologies blunted or even subverted the new conceptual possibilities for
              ecological thinking that the term environment both reflected and helped
              generate.
                      It seems fitting that the word “environment” would first appear in its
              modern guise in 1828, at the dawn of the period that would produce the
              factory town and the railroad, the Coal Question and the Great Guano
              Rush, Tess of the d’Urbervilles and Wuthering Heights, and, for many contem-
              porary critics, the first observable signs of the Anthropocene. Carlyle first
              uses it in his essay Goethe to translate the master’s original German
              Umgebung and to signify not merely surroundings or context (as it had
              been commonly used before) but rather the vital, ongoing influence of
              those surroundings upon a person or thing.1 As Ralph Jessop argues,
              this coinage arises from the “counter-Enlightenment” stance Carlyle
              took against the forces of mechanization and mechanical thinking: envi-
              ronment is an attempt to convey something of the holistic, “dialogical
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:42:22, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000542

