                    702          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                            This is not to quibble or to question the validity of the metaphors we
                    use to conjure up literary form. It is, though, to suggest that the metaphors
                    we use are always motivated, and that it is best to be as aware as we can of those
                    motivations, especially when we seek to connect texts to the social or natural
                    world by way of the formal attributes we ascribe to each. To the extent that
                    literary language—poetic, narrative, or dramatic—is highly organized, it is
                    not at all misleading to say that forms inhere in texts. At the same time,
                    the figures we employ in order to think cogently and creatively about form
                    are heuristic devices that need not be organically related to the texts at all.
                    We make use of some figures rather than others because we seek answers
                    to one set of questions rather than another. Our inquiries are context-
                    specific, as are the vocabularies we use to pursue them. Here again student
                    responses can be clarifying. Is literary form “in” a text, I ventriloquize them
                    asking, or is it something you just make up? Do you find it or invent it? Those
                    are not the only two options, but it is not hard to see why the question is posed
                    that way. Found or invented? The answer is yes. One challenge of teaching
                    formalism is to explain why that is so, and why it matters.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Paul B. Armstrong, “Form and History: Reading as an Aesthetic
                          Experience and Historical Act,” Modern Language Quarterly 69, no. 2
                          (2008): 195–219, 198.
                    2. Jonathan Kramnick and Anahid Nersessian, “Form and Explanation,”
                          Critical Inquiry 43, no. 3 (2017): 650–69, 664, 665.
                    3. Sandra Macpherson, “A Little Formalism,” ELH 82, no. 2 (2015): 385–
                          405, 390.
                    Formalism
                    HERBERT F. TUCKER
                    A        trusted colleague’s having written on form leaves me to tease out its
                              associated –ism, and the contentious family of terms of which that
                    suffix makes it a member. I don’t think my keyword belongs with
                    Methodism, Marxism, and other badges of adherence to a system of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800061X

                                                                                                         FO R M A L I S M           703
              belief. Nor does it quite go with spoonerism and aphorism, which you
              can commit but can hardly be committed to, much less profess. And
              yet these latter terms still faintly savor of the systematic: when we call a
              piece of wit a witticism we conjure an orientation towards discourse
              that seems a shade more deliberate than may be fully compatible with
              the free play of wit. Ditto the deeper gravamen of plagiarism, which
              denotes an act but connotes, alas, a policy. While formalism may not con-
              stitute a program for literary scholarship, it has designs on the field nev-
              ertheless. Finically preferring certain reading behaviors over others, it
              always arouses dislike. Long may it continue to do so.
                      Formalism, a fighting word, thrives on polemical occasions. Just now
              routinized contextualism is in retreat before a rising generation of scholars
              who don’t merely pay court to form as a matter of principle, or summon it
              to ice an argument already baked, but actively devise new tools of formal
              analysis whereby to generate arguments in the first place. We are at a junc-
              ture, that is, where formalism can afford to lick its wounds and savor the
              struggles in which they were earned. The latest struggles arose a couple of
              decades ago, at least for nineteenth-century studies they did, and as usual
              they were waged in the first instance by Romanticists—Susan Wolfson
              (1997), Marshall Brown (2000, 2006), Marjorie Levinson (2007)—who
              pushed back against a shopworn Historicism that was so far from New
              that it was cheapening monographs, overrunning conferences, and stulti-
              fying classrooms.1 By the time Levinson could invite PMLA readers to pon-
              der what the “New Formalism” was, the tide had turned, in a direction that
              the honorific plural in a 2013 title like New Formalisms and Literary Theory
              placed beyond doubt.2
                      As for the wounds, they tell a much older story. Francis Bacon and
              John Milton reprobated formalists as pretenders to wisdom who strutted
              a stiff attachment to conservative routine. In church matters the formalist
              was by innuendo a hypocrite, in matters of state a reactionary obstructing
              innovation under the cover of a strict constructionist devotion to rules.
              The likewise pejorative term formalism had to await Victorian coinage,
              of which the first OED usage occurs on a page from Alton Locke (1850)
              where Charles Kingsley’s frustrated hero twice decries it as a besetting
              sin of, you guessed it, intellectual life at the university.3 So hostile a tradi-
              tion leaves Victorianist formalism presumptively—until it speaks in its
              own defense—somewhere between arraignment under St. Paul’s spirited
              denunciation of the letter that killeth and the academic guilt that comes
              by association with, say, the doctrines of the late Antonin Scalia. But of
              course Victorianist formalism will speak in its own defense. Seeing to
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800061X

                    704          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    that is why I came to this VLC party. I can’t do so better than by remark-
                    ing (1) that defense is what formalism does best and (2) that literary stud-
                    ies in our time will have to play the best defense it can muster, up to and
                    including the kind that looks like, and risks giving, offense. Formalism is
                    not so much a position as an agenda, a disciplinary pressure whose self-
                    less mission is and ever has been to rescue literary study from the all too
                    human propensity to jilt art for the seductions of meaning.
                            Defining formalism is no fun: either the task devolves into tautology
                    or it stumbles into the rabbit-warren of defining form. We can do better by
                    asking what formalism’s opposite may be. Contentualism won’t help, if only
                    because it looks so much like the ungainly word that forms the subject of
                    my second paragraph’s second sentence. Please ponder the awkward neol-
                    ogy anyhow, long enough to appreciate its superfluity within a discipline
                    where it goes without saying that texts have content and are written and
                    published in order to deliver a message. Formalism finds a worthier oppo-
                    site in hermeneutics, which recognizes some rules of engagement and con-
                    cedes that finding out textual meanings requires skills that may be honed
                    by methodical practice. For it is at the ample table of hermeneutic method
                    that formalism perennially lobbies for a seat. It’s the business of formalism
                    to remind interpreters that there is no content without form and thus that
                    a failure to read for form is ultimately a disservice to content itself, which
                    will vary, by a little or a lot, wherever form does. Indeed, the relation is
                    reversible. Ralph Waldo Emerson’s glittering tissue of antiformalist slogans
                    in “The Poet” (1844) concedes the reciprocity of message with medium as
                    soon as it affirms the “instant dependence of form upon soul.” His insis-
                    tence that “it is not meters, but a meter-making argument that makes a
                    poem” demonstrates in the very saying of it that meter and poem are
                    alike made, that meters are the first fruits of poetic argument, and there-
                    fore that whoso would look on it must come to them.4 Interpretive mean-
                    ing grows intimate with interpretive performance.
                            Or maybe for our purposes the opposite of formalism is dynamism.
                    Derrida launched his epochal L’Écriture et la différence with an essay cham-
                    pioning “force” over “form,” prophetically aligning poststructuralism with
                    antiformalism—and yet, in the process, opening his work to eventual cri-
                    tique on the grounds that deconstruction was but formalism’s quintes-
                    sence.5 Cutting the cord between rhetorical contrivance and textual
                    meaning, deconstruction embraced the pursuit of signs and nothing
                    but, astray amid a wilderness of traces. We who are Victorianists needn’t
                    resort to wholesale de Manian demolition, however, to grasp form and
                    force as aspects of each other: their relation is written all over the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800061X

                                                                                                         FO R M A L I S M           705
              industrial era. Thomas Carlyle’s hyperventilating dynamism throbs across
              the literary nineteenth century. We meet it in John Ruskin’s architectural
              lesson that form follows function; in the life sciences’ subordination of
              morphology to physiology, entailed as it was by evolutionism’s master the-
              sis that what survives is what works; and most handily in the poetics of
              Gerard Manley Hopkins, where the inscape of created form, once caught,
              buckles to reveal the creative force of instress. This ubiquitous Victorian
              dynamism at once affirms the ultimate, ontological priority of force
              (form’s cause) and the mediate, practical priority of form (force’s
              index). As a matter of practice, if it’s force you’re after, then form is
              where you have to look for it—because form is after force too: the
              force that came and went is what form remains the legible trace of.6 So
              dynamism is not the opposite of formalism after all but instead its raison
              d’être. Say rather its pretext, and leave formalism to cope with what’s left:
              the text. This formalist will settle for that.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Susan Wolfson, Formal Charges: The Shaping of Poetry in British
                   Romanticism (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997); Wolfson
                   and Marshall Brown, eds., a special issue of Modern Language
                   Quarterly 61 (2000), and Reading for Form (Seattle: University of
                   Washington Press, 2006); Marjorie Levinson, “What Is New
                   Formalism?” PMLA 122 (2007): 558–69.
              2. Verena Thiele and Linda Tredennick, eds., New Formalisms and Literary
                   Theory (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013). See also Fredric
                   V. Bogel, New Formalist Criticism: Theory and Practice (New York:
                   Palgrave, 2013).
              3. Charles Kingsley, Alton Locke, Tailor and Poet: An Autobiography, ed.
                   Elizabeth A. Cripps (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983), 137,
                   see chap. 13.
              4. Selections from Ralph Waldo Emerson: An Organic Anthology, ed. Stephen
                   E. Whicher (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1957), 222, 225.
              5. Jacques Derrida, “Force et signification,” in L’Écriture et la différence
                   (Paris: Seuil, 1967), 9–50.
              6. See recent reflections on this dynamist theme in Sandra Macpherson,
                   “A Little Formalism,” ELH 82 (2015): 385–405, especially 388–89.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:04, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800061X

