                    706          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Free Indirect Discourse
                    ROSEMARIE BODENHEIMER
                    V       ICTORIAN writers didn’t have a name for it, but that did not prevent
                            them from producing the sentences that we have come to call free
                    indirect discourse. Originating in early twentieth-century linguistics,
                    the term acquired cachet during the period when omniscience was out
                    of fashion, and narrators were especially prized when they “disappeared”
                    into the inner thoughts of their characters. Since the recent turn to cog-
                    nitive literary studies, its cachet has reappeared, not because we prize the
                    fantasy of unmediated access to interiority, but because we are interested
                    in mind reading, collective thinking, and the history of mind theory.1
                             Free indirect discourse is a singularly bloodless term for the intensi-
                    fication of narrative it designates. It has been called by other names, most
                    of which maintain its grammatical and comparative nature. FID (as I will
                    call it) refers to sentences in third-person past-tense narration that imi-
                    tate the interior thoughts of a character. It is “free” only in the grammat-
                    ical sense that it’s not subordinated to a main clause such as “He
                    wondered,” or “She thought.”
                             There are more suggestive descriptions. The German phrase erlebte
                    Rede, or experienced speech, has the advantage of suggesting that some-
                    one is experiencing vivid mental and emotional activity. It’s as much
                    about hearing a voice as it is about penetrating a mind. Best of all, to
                    my mind, is the novelists’ nickname, “going into character.”2 It points
                    to the actual process of writing, the moments when the writer slides
                    into a new sort of role-playing, and begins ventriloquizing a character.
                    It also suggests that FID is something you go in and out of from some-
                    thing else; it depends on the context created by whatever else a narrator
                    is saying about a character’s thoughts and feelings. Alan Palmer calls such
                    description “thought report,” emphasizing that thought report takes up
                    most of the narrative space as a reader learns to know a character.3 In
                    Victorian fiction, islands of FID occur intermittently to punctuate seas
                    of thought report.
                             FID is often discussed as a personal relationship between narrator
                    and character, as if they were two sentient entities. D. A. Miller writes
                    of FID as “a virtuoso performance, against all odds, of the narration’s per-
                    sistence in detachment from the character, no matter how intimate the
                    one becomes with the other.”4 I would suggest that the drama of FID
                    lies elsewhere, in the mind of the writer shifting from one of its
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000621

                                                                            FREE IND IRECT DISCOURSE                                707
              narrational guises to another. Those who experience the enlivening effects
              of FID are the writer in the act of writing, and the reader in the act of
              reading.
                      Releasing FID from the narrator-character story frees us to consider
              some of the ambiguities raised by the practice. There has long been a
              debate about whether an instance of FID represents thought, inner
              speech, or something else. What do we think we are hearing: a character
              thinking in silent words, or something the character senses in half-
              conscious, inchoate ways, articulated for the reader by the narrator?
              The imitation of thought can only go so far to capture the flux of neural
              connections that goes on, consciously and not, in human brains. It fol-
              lows that FID relies on a set of conventions that pretend to interiority.
              In Victorian novels, those conventions stand out on the page: just scan
              the paragraphs looking for a sudden burst of question marks, exclama-
              tion points, italicized words, or dashes. Often, the character involved
              has been faced with some jolt or threat to a worldview, which s/he is
              struggling to accommodate or deny.5 Ambiguity may also appear in the
              temporality of FID. Is the thinking going on in the novel’s present
              scene, or is it a summary of inner tendencies over time?
                      Charles Dickens rarely moves into FID, but when he does, he is usu-
              ally depicting a mind in extremis. The murderers Bill Sikes and Jonas
              Chuzzlewit get brief moments of FID as they flee their crimes in states
              of near-madness. When Dickens’s Mr. Dombey broods over Florence,
              he is headed toward disintegration: “The worthier she promised to be
              of him, the greater claim he was disposed to ante-date upon her duty
              and submission. When had she ever shown him duty and submission?
              Did she grace his life—or Edith’s? . . . Why, he and she had never
              been, from her birth, like father and child! They had always been
              estranged. She had crossed him every way and everywhere. She was
              leagued against him now.”6
                      Checkmated by Edith, Dombey has entered a frantic state. Readers
              recognize that he has it exactly backwards, that he’s accusing Florence
              of his own failures. The passage occurs amid a long, emphatic thought
              report, but the difference is telling. The FID prompts the reader to a vis-
              ceral feeling of protest and dismay: how can you think like that? You are
              blind, paranoid! On second thought, we might recognize that Dombey is,
              at least, thinking about his daughter. The narrator will quickly reinforce
              that insight: “It may have been that in all this there were mutterings of an
              awakened feeling in his breast, however selfishly aroused by his position
              of disadvantage, in comparison with what she might have made his life.”
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000621

                    708          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Dickens is quick to rope the reader back into his interpretive authority,
                    but not before FID has worked its intensifying magic.
                            The boundary between thought report and FID is not always so easy
                    to ascertain. William Makepeace Thackeray’s callow George Osborne is
                    allotted some remorseful FID as he watches Amelia sleep before he
                    departs to die at Waterloo: “Good God! How pure she was; how gentle,
                    how tender, and how friendless! and he, how selfish, brutal, and black
                    with crime! Heart-stained, and shame-stricken, he stood at the bed’s
                    foot, and looked at the sleeping girl. How dared he—who was he, to
                    pray for one so spotless!”7 The melodramatic cliché exposes George as
                    a thoughtless rake even in his moment of apparent self-knowledge. But
                    not so fast: this can also sound disturbingly like the narrator’s own pas-
                    sages of sentimental doting over the body of his benighted heroine.
                    Thackeray will sometimes “go into character,” exclamations and ques-
                    tions flying, to animate his own narrator.
                            George Eliot’s subtle blends of FID and thought report are espe-
                    cially rich in ambiguities. Consider the cultural mind informing the
                    Middlemarch view of Dorothea:
                             Such a wife might awaken you some fine morning with a new scheme for the
                             application of her income which would interfere with political economy and
                             the keeping of saddle-horses: a man would naturally think twice before he
                             risked himself in such fellowship. Women were expected to have weak opin-
                             ions, but the great safeguard of society and domestic life was, that opinions
                             were not acted on. Sane people did what their neighbors did, so that if any
                             lunatics were at large, one might know and avoid them.8
                    The first sentence arguably imitates the logic and assumptions of an
                    upper-class male mind. The second begins like narrative report and
                    veers into comedy. The third might be anything, but its kick is palpable.
                    Whether you call it an articulation of what (George Eliot thinks) lies
                    deepest in Middlemarch instincts, or an indulgence in narrative sarcasm,
                    you have to laugh, and feel its pain.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. The founding literary study of FID in English remains Dorrit Cohn,
                          Transparent Minds: Narrative Modes for Presenting Consciousness in
                          Fiction (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978). Alan Palmer
                          builds on her work in a cognitive mode in Fictional Minds (Lincoln:
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000621

                                                    FREE INDIRECT DISCOURSE, GENERATIONS                                            709
                   University of Nebraska Press, 2004) and Social Minds in the Novel
                   (Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 2010). For a brief overview,
                   see David Herman, ed., The Emergence of Mind: Representations of
                   Consciousness in Narrative Discourse in English (Lincoln: University of
                   Nebraska Press, 2011), 1–40.
              2.   James Wood, How Fiction Works (New York: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux,
                   2008), 8.
              3.   Palmer, Fictional Minds, 13–14, 75–86.
              4.   D. A. Miller, Jane Austen, or The Secret of Style (Princeton: Princeton
                   University Press, 2003), 59.
              5.   Andrew Miller discusses FID as a vehicle for the ethics of casuistry in
                   The Burdens of Perfection: On Ethics and Reading in Nineteenth-Century
                   British Literature (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2008), 93–104.
              6.   Charles Dickens, Dombey and Son (Oxford: Oxford World’s Classics,
                   1999), 594.
              7.   William Thackeray, Vanity Fair (Oxford: Oxford World’s Classics,
                   1998), 360.
              8.   George Eliot, Middlemarch (Oxford: Oxford World’s Classics, 1998), 9.
              Generations
              TREV BROUGHTON AND HELEN KINGSTONE
                     HE term “generations” is everywhere. Successive demographic
              T      cohorts are construed as being in zero-sum competition over author-
              ity, airtime, resources, or power.1 In the British press, for instance, it is
              commonplace to see the interests of newly pensionable “babyboomers”
              pitted against those of “millennials,” and for such rivalry to be seen as
              personal, structural, or both. From serious sociological and economic
              analysis to pop-quiz punditry, it is taken for granted that the idea of a
              generation is useful. In cultural historiography, too, the term is ascribed
              explanatory force: first and second generation Romantic poets,
              “Bloomsbury” defying “Victorian,” and so on. In practice, however,
              such commentaries often rely on ahistorical assumptions about the
              meanings of age-identity (“child” versus “adult”), Freudian accounts of
              family structure (child vis-à-vis parent) and dialectical readings of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:23, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000621

