                                                                       G ENRE, GLOBAL CIRC ULATION                                  719
              performing more than one genre at once and signifying a text’s ability to
              move in multiple directions simultaneously. Attending more closely to any
              one of the above generic categories would surely yield a rich series of claims
              about the poem’s interpretation and use, both for Rossetti’s readers and
              today’s, but my main point is to sketch the ways in which genre becomes
              more dynamic as it functions within history, not less. Developing an increas-
              ingly sophisticated sense of genre, including its relation to form, can allow
              Victorianists to play to one of our chief strengths: our detailed and conscien-
              tious sense of historical context.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Carolyn Williams, “Genre Matters: Response,” Victorian Studies 48, no. 2
                   (2006): 517–20, 295; John Frow, Genre (New York: Routledge, 2015), 15.
              2. Wai Chee Dimock, “Genres as Fields of Knowledge,” PMLA 122, no. 5
                   (2007): 1379–80.
              3. Michael B. Prince, “Mauvais Genres,” New Literary History 34, no. 3
                   (2003): 452–79, 454.
              4. Caroline Levine, Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network (Princeton
                   University Press, 2015), 13.
              5. Fredric Jameson, The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic
                   Act (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981); Franco Moretti, Distant
                   Reading (London: Verso, 2013).
              6. Jameson, The Political Unconscious, 105.
              7. Levine, 13.
              8. Michael Cohen, “Getting Generic,” Nineteenth-Century Literature 71, no.
                   1 (2016): 147–55, 155.
              Global Circulation
              REGENIA GAGNIER
              I   N May 2017, I co-hosted a conference at the India Institute of Advanced
                   Study, Shimla, with a call for papers that read “Scholar-participants are
              expected to address and examine questions that . . . cut across at least two
              linguistic cultures. Papers that are too narrowly monolingual in their
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000657

                    720          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    focus will be given a lower priority in comparison with those that have a
                    multi-lingual focus.”1 The case of India makes clear the importance of lan-
                    guage at the base of states, rights, and entitlements. The Belgian economist
                    Phillipe Van Parijs, well known for his formulation and advocacy of a
                    Universal Basic Income, has understood this in proposing the rather uto-
                    pian notion of linguistic justice and a tax on English, and such ideas have
                    given rise to a thriving field of the Economics of Language. In multilingual
                    countries, a national literature will be diverse and promoted through trans-
                    lation, and India is a multilingual nation with one billion citizens and 415
                    languages and dialects. 415 is a conservative estimate. SIL Ethnologue lists
                    7000 languages in the world, and some argue that 2000 of them are cur-
                    rently in India, with 22 recognized in the Constitution for legal use, includ-
                    ing English. The Sahitya Akademi was founded in 1954 amidst debates over
                    national languages “to foster and co-ordinate literary activities in all the
                    Indian languages and to promote through them all the cultural unity of
                    the country.”2 In 1956 Jawaharlal Nehru divided states along linguistic
                    lines, exhorting them to learn each other’s languages to promote unity in
                    the newly independent India. Although with hindsight it appears that con-
                    trary to Nehru’s hopes, this linguistic division actually decreased multilin-
                    gualism, the debates tolerated even English as a possible force during the
                    unification of the new nation-state: “[English] does help in our under-
                    standing each other, more especially the people from the North and the
                    South . . . it provides a link between us and the outside world, and it is
                    of the utmost importance that we should maintain and recognize that
                    link . . . And not try to cut ourselves from it and isolate ourselves.”3
                    Today, it is worth noting that even the most oppressed groups in India
                    can make claims for empowerment through English. One spokesperson
                    for the Dalitbahujans (Dalit in Marathi is the term chosen by scheduled
                    castes to mean oppressed or broken and bahujan means majority),
                    Kancha Ilaiah, writes “English’s accessibility to the oppressed is creating a
                    new philosophy . . . In the future it can become a big instrument of libera-
                    tion of the Dalitbahujans and women. It translates the new global ideas
                    within no time and the organic intellectuals who could read and write in
                    that global language would be in a better position to handle these ideas
                    with much more confidence than those who cannot.”4 Without taking
                    sides on English, we can discern two contrasting possibilities for language:
                    language as local identity and community or as a process of change, as in
                    processes of globalization. Our attitude may be one of preservation and pro-
                    tection or laissez-faire and evolution. As languages become extinct, as
                    English or Mandarin becomes hegemonic, we may take the tolerant view
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000657

                                                                                     GLOBAL CIRCULATION                             721
              that languages serve the needs of their speakers and as speakers change
              their languages will evolve with them. Or we may say with Van Parijs that
              global languages are forms of domination, and that local languages are
              worth fighting for, or in any case that the idea of mother tongues and lan-
              guage purity only arose with modern nation-states.
                      I have begun with language because the global circulation of English
              language and literatures is largely the effect of the Victorian British
              empire and settlements and in the future this empire and settlements
              and their international relations, rather than an island’s literature, will
              be central to Victorian Studies. Thirty-five years of postcolonial studies
              have shown us the interdependence of things British and things global,
              and an even longer history of Marxisms has shown us the horizontal
              contexts between Britain and other empires and settler colonists in the
              nineteenth century and the vertical struggles (socioeconomic class,
              caste, ethnicity, gender, religion, etc.) within each of them.
                      Victorian ideologies of liberalism, individualism, nationalism, social-
              ism, cosmopolitanism, and Internationalism will be seen through other
              geopolitical movements, such as the May Fourth and New Cultures move-
              ments in China, the Meiji Restoration in Japan, the Turkish Tanzimat
              and the Arab Romanticism that resisted it. Well-known in Victorian
              Britain, Theosophy was also a global movement intended to rationalize
              and universalize religions; Esperanto was meant to provide a modern uni-
              versal language; even the New Woman was a social type circulated to mod-
              ernize gender relations. She appeared in Britain in the 1880–90s, in China
              in the 1920–30s, and in Arabic-speaking cultures in the 1950s.
                      Just one example. From the Victorian fin de siècle, Oscar Wilde and
              particularly his “Soul of Man under Socialism” (1891) was particularly
              influential on the young André Gide, and, through Gide, on colonial
              Annam (French Indochine today Vietnam). Wilde had argued in character-
              istically brilliant fashion that in order for individualism to flourish, society
              would first have to institute a level playing field through socialist redistribu-
              tion. Only from an initial basis of equality would people then be able to
              develop in accordance with their different and unique talents and capacities.
              In his “Défense de la culture” speech at the 1935 International Writers’
              Conference in Paris, the anti-fascist Gide used Wilde’s ideas to promote
              international solidarity through national particularity. Gide argued “There
              are, for peoples as for individuals, certain indices of particular refractions,
              and this is precisely the great interest of our cosmopolitan meeting . . . the
              culture that we aspire to defend is the sum of the particular cultures of
              each nation. This culture is our common good. It is common to all of us.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000657

                    722          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    It is international.”5 Like Wilde, Gide was working his way into being that
                    Victorian-inspired combination of communist individualist and national
                    Internationalist. He said: “For my part, I claim to be strongly internationalist
                    while remaining intensely French. In like manner, I am a fervent individual-
                    ist, though I am in full agreement with the communist outlook, and am actu-
                    ally helped in my individualism by communism.”6 On the topic of World
                    Literatures, he spoke out: “What could be more particularly Spanish than
                    Cervantes, English than Shakespeare, Russian than Gogol, French than
                    Rabelais or Voltaire—at the same time what could be more general and
                    more profoundly human.”7
                            The Wilde/Gide crux then appears in the Art for Art’s Sake Debates in
                    colonial Annam in 1935–39, so the relevant empire in which the Victorian
                    Wilde’s ideas were translated was the French and the relevant movement
                    was the communist International. Gide was attractive to the Vietnamese
                    for his “romanticism” (for them, the value he placed on individual subjective
                    expression) and his “realism” (for them, his representation of the real strug-
                    gles of the masses). In the Art for Art’s Sake Debates, the critic and activist
                    Hoài Thanh cited Gide in developing a cosmopolitan outlook, essentially
                    summarizing Wilde’s argument in “The Soul of Man”: “Gide expresses his
                    complete commitment to individualism. Individualism does not contradict
                    communism, but rather individualism needs communism in order to
                    reach complete fruition. The more an individual develops his character
                    the more the collective benefits, Gide claims. The same is true for each
                    national culture: the more each enunciates its distinctiveness, the more
                    [hu]mankind benefits.”8 While rebutted by “realist” Marxists, Gide’s
                    model of international solidarity through national particularity as adapted
                    by Hoài Thanh broke with the Confucian instrumental use of literature in
                    favour of creative and personal expression. Hoài Thanh thought that this
                    would lead to ethically autonomous individuals who would benefit the collec-
                    tive. The free development and articulation of the individual could only be
                    realized by the free development and articulation of all.
                            It is noteworthy that Wilde’s “Soul of Man under Socialism” translated
                    into Hebrew was also dear to the founders of Israel in the early days of the
                    socialist state. Chana Kronfeld, a specialist in Hebrew and Yiddish transla-
                    tion and transculturation, has noted how Wilde’s Importance of Being Earnest
                    (1895) was taken as an anti-anti-Semitic tract in the early days of Zionism.
                    Kronfeld has also discussed “The Soul of Man”’s circulation among the
                    early founders of the kibbutzim who inspired the anarcho-syndicalist
                    and socialist perspectives of Noam Chomsky and Bernie Sanders.9 Such
                    intercultural transvaluations of values often associated with Victorian
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000657

                                               G LO B A L C I R C U L ATI O N , H U M A N I TA R I A N( I S M )                     723
              Britain—individualism, socialism, nationalism, internationalism, cosmo-
              politanism, and so forth—will be central to the development of
              Victorian Studies in the future. If we don’t motivate ourselves, we will be
              motivated by our international, multilingual students and university man-
              agers funding our global collaborations.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. India Institute of Advanced Study International Conference,
                   “Purifying the Dialect of the Tribe: Cross-Cultural Concerns in
                   Colonial and Postcolonial India,” Rashtrapati Niwas, Shimla, May
                   17–19, 2017.
              2. Ministry of Education Report, 1971, in Wendy Singer, Independent
                   India 1947–2000 (Harlow: Longman, 2012), 153.
              3. Report of the Official Language Commission, 1956, minuting Nehru,
                   in Singer, Independent India, 153.
              4. Kancha Ilaiah, The Weapon of the Other: Dalitbahujan Writings and the
                   Remaking of Indian Nationalist Thought (Delhi: Pearson, 2010), 174.
              5. Ben Tran, “Queer Internationalism and Modern Vietnamese
                   Aesthetics,” in The Oxford Handbook of Global Modernisms, ed. Mark
                   Wollaeger and Matt Eatough (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
                   2012), 367–87, 369.
              6. Tran, “Queer Internationalism,” 370.
              7. Tran, “Queer Internationalism,” 371.
              8. Tran, “Queer Internationalism,” 374.
              9. Personal communication at the Asia-Pacific Forum on Translation and
                   Intercultural Studies “Translation and World Literature,” University of
                   California, Berkeley, October 20–22, 2017.
              Humanitarian(ism)
              SARAH WINTER
              W         RITING in 1860 to Lord Newcastle, the Colonial Secretary,
                        Florence Nightingale asked for his assistance in conducting a sur-
              vey of the mortality rates of Maori and Aboriginal students in colonial
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000657

