                    728          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       9. Henry Dunant, A Memory of Solferino (American Red Cross, 1939;
                            Geneva: The International Committee of the Red Cross, English
                            Version, 1953), 73.
                    10. For a detailed study of contemporary humanitarian ethics, see Hugo
                            Slim, Humanitarian Ethics: A Guide to the Morality of Aid in War and
                            Disaster (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015).
                    11. See Michael Barnett, Empire of Humanity: A History of Humanitarianism
                            (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2011), 40.
                    12. Thomas W. Laqueur, “Bodies, Details, and the Humanitarian
                            Narrative,” in The New Cultural History, ed. Lynn Hunt (Berkeley:
                            University of California Press, 1989), 176–204, 176–78.
                    13. Barnett, Empire of Humanity, 9.
                    14. Caroline Shaw, Britannia’s Embrace: Modern Humanitarianism and the
                            Imperial Origins of Refugee Relief (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
                            2015).
                    15. Lester and Dussart, Colonization, 10, 115.
                    16. Internment camps were also used by Spanish, American, Italian, and
                            German military authorities in colonial conflicts during this period;
                            see Kristen McConnachie, “Camps of Containment: A Genealogy of
                            the Refugee Camp,” Humanity: An International Journal of Human
                            Rights, Humanitarianism, and Development 7, no. 3 (2016): 397–412,
                            402–04.
                    17. On the improvised development of colonial legal governance, see
                            Lauren Benton and Lisa Ford, Rage for Order: The British Empire and
                            the Origins of International Law 1800–1850 (Cambridge: Harvard
                            University Press, 2016).
                    Ideology
                    ZACHARY SAMALIN
                    F      EW concepts are more deeply rooted in the social and intellectual
                           terrain of the nineteenth century than ideology, and yet there can
                    be no question that the political circumstances of the present demand
                    a working conception of ideology with as much urgency as ever before.
                    When we look into what is meant by the term, then, we also raise a set
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000670

                                                                                                            I D E O LOGY            729
              of questions about the extent to which the contemporary social world
              continues to be shaped by structures and problems originating in the
              tumult of the nineteenth century.
                      In its most common usage, derived from Karl Marx and Friedrich
              Engels, the concept of ideology denotes the fact that certain aspects of
              a thought process which seem to originate in one’s own psyche are in
              fact socially and historically conditioned; what feels personal and individ-
              ual is revealed to be collective and to originate outside the self. As Engels
              described it, “Ideology is a process accomplished by the so-called thinker
              consciously, indeed, but with a false consciousness. The real motives
              impelling him remain unknown to him . . . Hence he imagines false or
              apparent motives.”1 In the history of Marxist theory, this notion of false
              consciousness has proved to be as influential as problematic, raising
              vexed questions about who is entitled to ascribe such mystified psycholog-
              ical states to whom, and on what grounds; it is also this dimension of ide-
              ology that invited various attempts at integration with psychoanalytic
              theory throughout the twentieth century.
                      However, what was most significant in Engels’s formulation was that
              the notion of ideology pointed beyond the psychological domain, even
              as it seemed to demand some account of how consciousness functioned.
              In The German Ideology, Marx and Engels asserted that the value of ideas
              derives from the basic organization of a society—the division of labor—
              and not merely from some quality inherent in the ideas themselves. To
              imagine that religious, legal, or aesthetic values were intrinsic to their
              own domains, and not expressive in some way of socioeconomic struc-
              tures, they argued, was to fall prey to ideology. Unlike the problem of
              false consciousness, which zooms in on the subject, this aspect of ideol-
              ogy sits at the root of modern sociological theory, since it imbricates
              the individual in a larger web of associations. This conceptual ambiva-
              lence makes ideology seem at times a deterministic theory of conscious-
              ness, at others a relational account of the interpenetration of different
              areas of social life. It is most useful to think of the concept as providing
              a hinge between these two different registers of theoretical explanation.
                      The whole complex of questions put into play by the consideration
              of ideology should be seen as arising out of the specific social upheavals
              of the nineteenth century. As Karl Mannheim observed in his landmark
              analysis, Ideology and Utopia, the most fundamental shift in this respect was
              the secularization of the social-epistemological function of religion. Prior
              to the modern period, Mannheim argued, matters of truth, error and
              false belief were addressed primarily within the religious domain,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000670

                    730          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    whereas in the nineteenth century the adjudication of reality fell increas-
                    ingly under the aegis of “an ontology derived from political experience,”
                    on the one hand, and from scientific practice on the other.2 Today, it is
                    perhaps easier to see how Victorian-era scientific advances wrested epis-
                    temological authority from religion. Yet in Marx, the concept of ideology
                    first emerges through the extension of Ludwig Feuerbach’s critique of
                    religion to the analysis of socioeconomic institutions. Indeed, there is a
                    secularization narrative baked into Marx’s earliest thinking about ideol-
                    ogy, which presupposes secularization as the condition of modern life
                    enabling one to see not only that religion is an ideological structure,
                    but that economic relations in particular enact an organizing function
                    in society.
                            Over the course of the nineteenth century, then, political action and
                    social life became the dominant domains of experience for the arbitra-
                    tion of certain forms of non-scientific knowledge. The allegation of ide-
                    ology reflects this transformation, insofar as it derides some ideas as
                    groundless “echoes” and “phantoms,” while categorizing others as legit-
                    imately rooted in material reality.3 Marx’s distinction between a philoso-
                    phy that interprets the world and one that changes it also expresses this
                    historical reprioritization of political experience. Mannheim observes
                    that these shifting intellectual priorities themselves reflect the period’s
                    extreme political turbulence. “Only in a world in upheaval,” he writes,
                    “in which fundamental new values are being created and destroyed,
                    can intellectual conflict go so far that antagonists will seek to annihilate
                    not merely the specific beliefs and attitudes of one another, but also the
                    real intellectual foundations upon which these beliefs and attitudes
                    rest.”4
                            In this regard, ideology emerged to address the particular needs of a
                    nineteenth-century lifeworld in which new ideas about the relationship
                    between economy and society were supplanting critical analysis of the
                    weakening relationship between church and state, against an unstable
                    backdrop of industrial immiseration, perpetual war, scientific progress,
                    imperial rapacity, and a political whirlwind of utopian hopes, incremen-
                    tal change, and authoritarian relapse. We are thus certainly justified in
                    asking to what degree the concept retains its explanatory purchase in a
                    current moment defined less by expansion or tumult than by the slow,
                    steady scavenging of the liberal state, and an extractive capitalism that
                    relies less and less on the forms of labor power associated with
                    nineteenth-century industry. Has our social reality changed faster than
                    the tools we use to analyze it?
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000670

                                                                                                            I D E O LOGY            731
                      Significantly, there is an aspect of ideology critique especially suited
              to answering this question. For while the historical shifts that yielded the
              concept of ideology were specific to the nineteenth century, these trans-
              formations also signaled a fundamental movement away from theorizing
              the social in terms of timeless and unchanging values, and instead
              towards the recognition of historical change itself as the ground for epis-
              temological experience. That is, it was the effect of particular historical
              changes to allow historical change per se to emerge as a category seen
              to have a determining effect on the foundations of what people think,
              value, and deem to be true. In this context, it is less useful to speak of
              false consciousness than it is to observe that ideas which might have
              had significant nonideological social functions in the past can neverthe-
              less become ideological over time. Ideology here refers to a form of knowl-
              edge that clings to outmoded verities while simultaneously disavowing
              historical change. As Mannheim puts it, “from this standpoint, knowl-
              edge is distorted and ideological when it fails to take account of the
              new realities applying to a situation, and when it attempts to conceal
              them by thinking of them in categories which are inappropriate.”5
                      Our contemporary society is saturated by this kind of stubborn yet
              brittle ideological thinking. In the American context, it is apparent in
              the way that certain liberal-democratic ideals, such as the freedom of
              speech, will be defended as unalterable pillars of culture even as they
              are continually mobilized in new ways by antidemocratic economic
              forces. In such instances, defense of the status quo through the appeal
              to the timelessness of ideals serves to obfuscate the fact of real change.
              In the case of freedom of speech so prominent today, people who reflex-
              ively defend the right of neo-Nazis to hold armed assemblies under the
              First Amendment fail not only to see the ways in which harmful speech
              and violent action converge, but also to recognize that the whole cate-
              gory of speech has been actively reoriented in recent decades in order
              to accommodate exploitative free market interests. It is not hard to imag-
              ine a near future in which the legitimate ideal of a society free from state
              censorship is entirely repurposed in order to defend the reactionary
              interests who are today its most ardent proponents. What is ideological
              in such cases is the refusal to recognize how the social function of an
              idea is subject to historical changes that transcend the horizons of its
              internal coherence, its moral value, or its truth. Even when our most
              vital ideas appear grounded in our social reality, the enduring lesson
              of ideology critique is that when the ground moves, it drags us as well
              as our ideas along for the ride.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000670

                    732          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Friedrich Engels to Franz Mehring, London, July 14, 1893, in Marx
                          and Engels Collected Works, Vol. 50 (London: Lawrence and Wishart,
                          2010), 164.
                    2. Karl Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia: An Introduction to the Sociology of
                          Knowledge (New York: Harcourt, 1936), 73.
                    3. Karl Marx, The German Ideology (New York: Prometheus Books, 1998), 42.
                    4. Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia, 64.
                    5. Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia, 96.
                    Image
                    LINDA M. SHIRES
                             The past is not dead, but is living in us, and will be alive in the future which
                             we are now helping to make.
                                       —William Morris, “Preface,” Medieval Lore from Bartholomew Anglicus.1
                    P      ROMPTED by the word image, this mini-essay recalls a Greco-Roman
                           legacy of the sister arts.2 While the Victorians creatively expanded the
                    relationship between the visual and the verbal, we reconceive such a rela-
                    tionship again in our digital era. The nineteenth century witnessed an
                    increase of illustrated texts. Poems inspired art, paintings inspired
                    poems, and painters appended verses to artworks. The Pre-Raphaelite
                    arts and crafts movement was born. Victorians flourished as satirical car-
                    toonists; illustrated magazines and novels thrived; museum reforms
                    engaged Parliament commissions and journalists. Developments in color
                    theory fostered ideas about how the eye works with light, while optical
                    devices replaced the camera obscura’s focus on interiority. Color-makers
                    created new pigments. In fact, as Martin Meisel remarked, the century’s col-
                    laboration between storytelling and image-making markedly characterized
                    theater, literature and art.3 Additionally, the visual arts helped shape, not
                    simply illustrate, science, including the mind sciences, and numerous
                    other fields. Notably, too, the 2017 John Lockwood Kipling exhibit at the
                    Victoria and Albert Museum/Bard Graduate Center reveals the complexity
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:43:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000670

