                    732          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Friedrich Engels to Franz Mehring, London, July 14, 1893, in Marx
                          and Engels Collected Works, Vol. 50 (London: Lawrence and Wishart,
                          2010), 164.
                    2. Karl Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia: An Introduction to the Sociology of
                          Knowledge (New York: Harcourt, 1936), 73.
                    3. Karl Marx, The German Ideology (New York: Prometheus Books, 1998), 42.
                    4. Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia, 64.
                    5. Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia, 96.
                    Image
                    LINDA M. SHIRES
                             The past is not dead, but is living in us, and will be alive in the future which
                             we are now helping to make.
                                       —William Morris, “Preface,” Medieval Lore from Bartholomew Anglicus.1
                    P      ROMPTED by the word image, this mini-essay recalls a Greco-Roman
                           legacy of the sister arts.2 While the Victorians creatively expanded the
                    relationship between the visual and the verbal, we reconceive such a rela-
                    tionship again in our digital era. The nineteenth century witnessed an
                    increase of illustrated texts. Poems inspired art, paintings inspired
                    poems, and painters appended verses to artworks. The Pre-Raphaelite
                    arts and crafts movement was born. Victorians flourished as satirical car-
                    toonists; illustrated magazines and novels thrived; museum reforms
                    engaged Parliament commissions and journalists. Developments in color
                    theory fostered ideas about how the eye works with light, while optical
                    devices replaced the camera obscura’s focus on interiority. Color-makers
                    created new pigments. In fact, as Martin Meisel remarked, the century’s col-
                    laboration between storytelling and image-making markedly characterized
                    theater, literature and art.3 Additionally, the visual arts helped shape, not
                    simply illustrate, science, including the mind sciences, and numerous
                    other fields. Notably, too, the 2017 John Lockwood Kipling exhibit at the
                    Victoria and Albert Museum/Bard Graduate Center reveals the complexity
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:03, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000682

                                                                                                                   IMAGE            733
              of arts and crafts debates across the Empire—with their cultural, economic,
              and political implications.
                      Some years ago Jonah Siegel argued that, due to modern defini-
              tions, we have greatly underestimated the “power, persistence, and coher-
              ence of a culture of art that is so evidently important for writers from
              Reynolds to James, from Keats to Wilde, and beyond.”4 While cultural
              coherence might be questioned, our underestimation continues. The
              “pictorial turn” and more recent image and cognitive theories have cer-
              tainly helped us understand multiple ways in which we can consider what
              images are and how we relate to them, whether graphic, optical, percep-
              tual, mental, or verbal.”5 Yet we still downplay their collaborative influ-
              ence on cultural transformation, on who we are . . . and who we will be.
                      Scholars often privilege the verbal or ignore relationships of image and
              text that affected both sexes and all classes in the long nineteenth century.
              To be sure, websites such as Victoriaweb, Victorianvoices.net, Center for
              Digital Humanities, Toronto, the Blake and Rossetti archives, the British
              Library, or BRANCH feature an array of texts, criticism, and images.
              Digital Humanities flourishes. Nonetheless, multiple publishers continue
              to offer e-books or reprints lacking the original Victorian illustrations or
              they limit illustrations in scholarly works, dramatically altering meaning
              and interpretation. As J. Hillis Miller noted, in separating images from text
              we miss “the meanings and forces generated by their adjacency.”6 Today’s
              studies of nineteenth-century texts prove strongest when they address
              kinds of images accompanying a text and analyze images created by the
              text, within historical, aesthetic, and sociological contexts. It is clear that
              our cultural conditions for seeing, imagining and knowing have now radi-
              cally altered. Perhaps there are reasons why we underestimate. In fact, why
              do some paired verbal or visual objects last and some not? According to
              Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, texts hold virtual potentialities for their
              future consumers.7 One or the other type of representation may drop
              away permanently; some survive doubly, some singly, some do not survive
              at all. Some become agents of cultural change. W. J. T. Mitchell rightly sug-
              gests that images last when they hold an unknown within them “waiting to be
              described in a new way.”8 The greatness of Victorian literature lies partly
              in its dual (and then multiplied) dimensions of meaning, whether that
              derives from double poems, dramatic monologues with silent auditors, pen-
              dant poems, double plots, other aesthetic forms stressing dual perspective,
              irony, metaphor and simile, intertexts, or because of complex relationships
              of image and text. Such collaborations—from Goblin Market to David
              Copperfield to The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals to Just So
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:03, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000682

                    734          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Stories—sparked Victorians’ imaginations and stir our minds today. How?
                    Such image/texts question themselves even as they put forth meanings.
                    They demand a cognitive fluidity—even a halting and restarting—more
                    than merely a focusing on separate visual or verbal components and more
                    than merely thinking in terms of illustration.
                            Relationships between image and text in the long nineteenth century
                    evolved, depending upon genre, tone, type, size and the placement of art
                    and words. It matters greatly that for the full-page serial illustration,
                    “Rebecca’s Farewell,” in Vanity Fair’s Chapter One, William Thackeray
                    altered his sketch spatially, including details that previewed significant
                    moments to come in the novel.9 He inserted two urns, two pillars,
                    two coachmen, a serpentine whip, re-centered Becky and her toss of Dr.
                    Johnson’s Dictionary, and proceeded to create a double response towards
                    his fiction—within the image itself and within the reader-viewer. Little
                    Laura’s sentiment and kind Jemima’s terror are equally satirized.
                    Conversely, it matters to an interpretation of “The Impercipient” that
                    Thomas Hardy’s title indicates deficient perception and that his illustration
                    for the poem features the interior of a cathedral with the top of the image
                    cut off (a truncated vertical indicates a ruin, not any avenue to heaven) and
                    the backs of a congregation.10 Similarly, it matters that Lewis Carroll’s less
                    effective Underground images served as models for Tenniel’s Wonderland.11
                    The relationship of visual and verbal dimensions in nineteenth-century
                    texts varies. It ranges from clear reinforcement, to play, to repetition with
                    difference, to argument, to collaboration, to opposition, to sly undercutting,
                    to open questioning, to insistence on a reprocessing for reasons from ethics
                    to allegory recognition. The field of Victorian images and texts—how they
                    function in meaning-making and signal cultural changes that are intellec-
                    tual, moral, and social—still remains underexplored.
                            To be sure, readers and viewers are not all alike. Laura Otis’s research
                    draws on advances in neuroscience, psychology, philosophy, and linguistics
                    to explore kinds of mental processing, some beyond visual and verbal.12 As
                    we try to understand how cultural change zigzagged us towards the age of
                    digital media and beyond, we must continue to investigate nineteenth-
                    century visual and verbal ways of seeing, imagining, knowing.
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. William Morris, “Preface,” Medieval Lore from Bartholomew Anglicus, ed.
                            Robert Steele (London: Elliot Stooke, 1983), https://www.marxists.
                            org/archive/morris/works/1893/robert.htm.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:03, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000682

                                                                                        I M A G E , I MP E R I A L I S M            735
                2. For example, see Homer for the making of Achilles’s shield (18: 468–
                     607) and Horace (480–81) for a linking of poetry to painting. Homer,
                     The Iliad, trans. Richmond Lattimore (Chicago: University of Chicago
                     Press, 2011); Horace, Satires. Epistles. The Art of Poetry, trans. H. Rushton
                     Fairclough (Harvard: Harvard University Press, 2005).
                3. Martin Meisel, Realizations: Narrative, Pictorial, and Theatrical Arts in
                     Nineteenth-Century England (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
                     1984).
                4. Jonah Siegel, Desire and Excess: The Nineteenth-Century Culture of Art
                     (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), xxiv.
                5. W. J. T. Mitchell, Image Science: Iconology, Visual Culture, and Media
                     Aesthetics (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2015), 505.
                6. J. Hillis Miller, Illustration: Essays in Art and Culture (Cambridge:
                     Harvard University Press, 1994), 9.
                7. Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus (Minneapolis:
                     University Minnesota Press, 1987), 3–7.
                8. Mitchell, Image Science, 88.
                9. William Makepeace Thackeray, Vanity Fair (New York: Oxford
                     University Press, 1983); the sketch for “Rebecca’s Farewell” is located
                     in the Hyde Collection, Houghton Library, Harvard University.
              10. Thomas Hardy, “The Impercipient,” Wessex Poems (Keele: Ryburn,
                     1995), 181–85.
              11. Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures Underground (Toronto: Dover, 1965),
                     Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking-Glass
                     (New York: Penguin Press, 1998).
              12. Laura Otis, Rethinking Thought: Inside the Minds of Creative Scientists and
                     Artists (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016).
              Imperialism
              PATRICK BRANTLINGER
              E      MPIRES emerge when stronger polities or nation-states dominate
                      weaker ones, typically through military conquest. Though they incor-
              porated many different populations, the ancient empires—Egyptian,
              Persian, Greek, Roman, Chinese—were, generally speaking, territorially
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:03, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000682

