                                                                                        I M A G E , I MP E R I A L I S M            735
                2. For example, see Homer for the making of Achilles’s shield (18: 468–
                     607) and Horace (480–81) for a linking of poetry to painting. Homer,
                     The Iliad, trans. Richmond Lattimore (Chicago: University of Chicago
                     Press, 2011); Horace, Satires. Epistles. The Art of Poetry, trans. H. Rushton
                     Fairclough (Harvard: Harvard University Press, 2005).
                3. Martin Meisel, Realizations: Narrative, Pictorial, and Theatrical Arts in
                     Nineteenth-Century England (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
                     1984).
                4. Jonah Siegel, Desire and Excess: The Nineteenth-Century Culture of Art
                     (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), xxiv.
                5. W. J. T. Mitchell, Image Science: Iconology, Visual Culture, and Media
                     Aesthetics (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2015), 505.
                6. J. Hillis Miller, Illustration: Essays in Art and Culture (Cambridge:
                     Harvard University Press, 1994), 9.
                7. Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus (Minneapolis:
                     University Minnesota Press, 1987), 3–7.
                8. Mitchell, Image Science, 88.
                9. William Makepeace Thackeray, Vanity Fair (New York: Oxford
                     University Press, 1983); the sketch for “Rebecca’s Farewell” is located
                     in the Hyde Collection, Houghton Library, Harvard University.
              10. Thomas Hardy, “The Impercipient,” Wessex Poems (Keele: Ryburn,
                     1995), 181–85.
              11. Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures Underground (Toronto: Dover, 1965),
                     Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking-Glass
                     (New York: Penguin Press, 1998).
              12. Laura Otis, Rethinking Thought: Inside the Minds of Creative Scientists and
                     Artists (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016).
              Imperialism
              PATRICK BRANTLINGER
              E      MPIRES emerge when stronger polities or nation-states dominate
                      weaker ones, typically through military conquest. Though they incor-
              porated many different populations, the ancient empires—Egyptian,
              Persian, Greek, Roman, Chinese—were, generally speaking, territorially
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000694

                    736          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    contiguous. But the modern, Western empires that began to form during
                    the Renaissance extended overseas to the Americas, many parts of Asia
                    and Africa, and by the late 1700s to the South Pacific and Australasia.
                    Starting in the late 1400s, the Portuguese and Spanish were first to
                    claim major overseas possessions, followed by the Dutch, French, and
                    English, and eventually by other European nations, including Italy,
                    Belgium, and Germany. Besides these overseas empires, by the 1800s,
                    in Eastern Europe, Western Asia, and North Africa there were three
                    other large empires: Austro-Hungarian, Russian, and Ottoman.
                            With the Tudor and then Cromwellian invasions of Ireland, England
                    came to dominate its “Celtic fringe,” including also Wales and Scotland.
                    So England had an “internal empire” before it had overseas colonies.
                    And insofar as the English viewed the Irish as a foreign and inferior
                    race, racism arose as an ideological corollary of modern imperialism.
                    All of the nation-states of Europe viewed the inhabitants of the empires
                    they established abroad as their racial inferiors, typically either as “bar-
                    barians” or “savages.” Racism then gave rise to one of the standard justi-
                    fications for imperialism, the so-called “civilizing mission” of the “white
                    man” to rescue the “savages” from their supposedly benighted customs
                    and beliefs. Missionaries such as David Livingstone often were part of
                    the vanguard of empires. Stereotypes about savagery were also fueled
                    by the often fierce resistance that indigenous peoples almost everywhere
                    posed to European invaders. That resistance was usually defeated by
                    Western firepower and diseases to which non-Westerners had little or
                    no immunity. These factors gave rise to the widespread idea that most
                    or even all of the “dark races” of the world were doomed to extinction
                    as the white “race” took over their lands.
                            Modern racism was strengthened by the slave trade and slavery.
                    Portugal, Spain, France, and Britain all imported slaves from West
                    Africa to work on sugar cane and cotton plantations in the
                    Americas. Meanwhile so-called “scientific racism” developed from
                    Enlightenment natural history, leading to social Darwinism and the
                    eugenics movement of the late nineteenth century. By 1900, the dom-
                    inant view among Europeans was that most if not all of history could
                    be explained by race warfare, with the so-called “white race” almost
                    always coming out on top. Even within the European context, race
                    conflict seemed to explain history, as in the case of the Norman con-
                    quest of England.
                            Unlike the old term “empire,” “imperialism” is of relatively recent
                    origin, and typically refers either to the process of the formation of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000694

                                                                                                      I MP E R I A L I S M          737
              empires or to ideological justifications for their existence. Sometimes that
              process involved colonization, or the establishment of permanent settle-
              ments by migrants from the dominant polity or metropole. That was the
              case with Britain’s North American colonies, but not with British India.
              Both before and after the Indian “mutiny” or rebellion of 1857–58,
              Britons did not look to establish permanent colonies there. Apart from
              Algeria and southern Africa, the European powers did not usually seek
              to establish major colonies in that continent either. Moreover, settler
              colonialism in the Americas, Australia, and elsewhere often produced
              genocides against indigenous populations.
                      In The Expansion of England (1883), Sir J. R. Seeley famously
              declared, “We seem, as it were, to have conquered and peopled half
              the world in a fit of absence of mind.”1 To the extent that British impe-
              rialism did not dominate British culture before the 1880s, his statement
              is perhaps accurate. Yet imperial and colonial affairs were of major
              importance in governance, in the news, in literature and in the arts.
              The rise of the “new Imperialism” with the so-called “scramble for
              Africa” starting in 1883 made questions of empire inescapable in
              Britain and Europe. What was particularly new in the 1880s was the com-
              petition among the European nations over most of the portions of the
              globe that had not yet been incorporated into their empires. That com-
              petition included new entries from Belgium (King Leopold’s private
              empire in the Congo), Italy (Libya and Eritrea), and Germany
              (German East Africa and Southwestern Africa). Meanwhile the expan-
              sion of the United States under the aegis of “Manifest Destiny” to the
              Pacific Ocean and beyond led to most of the planet being incorporated
              into the Western empires. Yet after World War I those empires began to
              crumble.
                      After the American Revolution, Britain came to view most of its
              other territories of “white settlement” as places that would eventually
              “mature” into partial independence. Running their own affairs,
              Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and perhaps even Cape Colony might
              become loyal members of a “commonwealth” of nations. It was harder
              to make that case for India and Ireland. The Irish struggle for indepen-
              dence was ongoing and often violent, and—as the Indian Rebellion
              proved—that was the case also with “the Raj.” Except for Northern
              Ireland, most of Ireland would break away from English domination by
              1921, and India achieved independence by 1948. Decolonization fol-
              lowed in many parts of the world, leading to an era that has been called
              “postcolonial.”
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000694

                    738          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                            The freedom struggles of the colonized gave rise to new literatures
                    and ideas about empire and race. In the past, notions of race conflict
                    and the racial superiority of Europeans, often accompanied by the idea
                    of a “civilizing mission,” downplayed the issue of economic exploitation.
                    But the first stage in the creation of modern empires frequently involved
                    the activities of trading companies such as the British East India
                    Company (EIC). To protect its interests both against indigenous resistance
                    and European competitors, the EIC developed an army consisting mainly
                    of Indian troops or sepoys, which eventually led to the British takeover of
                    most of the subcontinent. As Karl Marx, John Hobson, and Vladimir
                    Lenin recognized, in theorizing about empires it is impossible to ignore
                    issues of economic exploitation. And although decolonization may have
                    ended Europe’s official political domination of its former colonies, it has
                    not brought economic exploitation to an end. After World War II, the
                    World Bank and the International Monetary Fund were supposed to
                    help the so-called underdeveloped world catch up economically with the
                    West. But rather than achieving a benign condition of globalization and
                    economic progress, while the power and wealth of transnational corpora-
                    tions, based mainly in the West, has grown, poverty throughout much of
                    the world has increased. To call our present era “postcolonial” is therefore
                    misleading. It is more accurate to speak of “neocolonialism,” as Kwame
                    Nkrumah, first president of independent Ghana, did in the 1960s.
                            Furthermore, after 9/11, the U. S. invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq
                    have demonstrated that military versions of imperialism have not gone
                    away. The approximately 800 military bases the U. S. maintains around
                    the world reinforce its version of economic imperialism via transnational
                    corporate capitalism. Through so-called “free trade” agreements such as
                    NAFTA, the U. S., Britain, and the EU also maintain their worldwide eco-
                    nomic domination. Current economic, political, and military practices
                    no doubt differ from those of the past, but they are nevertheless contin-
                    uations of Western imperialism. The old notions of the “civilizing mis-
                    sion” and of the racial superiority of “the white man” may have given
                    way to ideas about globalization, development, and racial equality. But
                    these merely disguise the growing economic divide between the West
                    and the Rest, and in many places including the U. S., insistence on racial
                    differences and “white supremacy” persist. From the 1400s on, Western
                    imperialism, fueled by capitalist expansion, has been the major factor
                    driving both global modernization and increasing global inequality and
                    poverty. It has also been a major factor underlying many wars and
                    genocides.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000694

                                                                          IMPERIALISM, INFO RMATION                                 739
                                                                       NOTE
              1. Sir John R. Seeley, The Expansion of England, ed. John Gross (Chicago:
                   Chicago University Press, 1971), 12.
              Information
              RICHARD MENKE
              W         HEN Jane Austen’s Emma Woodhouse skeptically asks Harriet
                        Smith whether Robert Martin is “a man of information,” a man
              who reads “beyond the line of his own business,” she isn’t inquiring
              about whether Harriet’s would-be suitor possesses a large set of arbitrary
              data. Rather, Emma is questioning the breadth of his general culture,
              ungenerously applying a vague standard of gentlemanly cultivation to a
              yeoman farmer. Harriet’s flustered answer suggests that she perceives
              the tenor of the question but struggles to frame Robert’s reading habits
              in such terms: “Oh yes!—that is, no—I do not know—but I believe he has
              read a good deal—but not what you would think any thing of. He reads
              the Agricultural Reports, and some other books that lay in one of the win-
              dow seats. . . . But sometimes of an evening, before we went to cards, he
              would read something aloud out of the Elegant Extracts. . . . And I know
              he has read the Vicar of Wakefield.”1 The utilitarian agricultural reports
              would fail Emma’s test, the books on the window seat represent arbitrary
              rather than general reading, and while Vicesimus Knox’s Elegant Extracts
              might bespeak a laudable impulse toward self-improvement, this popular
              anthology suggests not wide-ranging cultivation but efficient edification
              via preselected highlights. (Emma herself turns to the book as a source
              of riddles, and in real life, Austen had given a copy of it to a niece in
              1801.) Perhaps The Vicar of Wakefield might pass muster.
                      Elsewhere, too, Austen associates information with general self-
              cultivation via reading. As a girl, Catherine Morland prefers “baseball . . .
              to books—or at least books of information—for, provided that nothing
              like useful knowledge could be gained from them, provided they were all
              story and no reflection, she had never any objection to books at all.” For
              Austen, information is “useful knowledge” of a particular sort. It resides not
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:07, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000694

