                    742          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Jane Austen, Emma, ed. James Kinsley (Oxford: Oxford University
                          Press, 2003), 23 (emphasis mine).
                    2. Jane Austen, Northanger Abbey, in Northanger Abbey, Lady Susan, The
                          Watsons, Sanditon, ed. James Kinsley and John Davie (Oxford:
                          Oxford University Press, 2003), 7.
                    3. Geoffrey Nunberg, “Farewell to the Information Age,” in The Future of
                          the Book (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), 103–38.
                    4. James Anthony Froude, “On Progress,” in Short Studies on Great Subjects,
                          2nd ser. (New York: Scribner, 1872), 262–63.
                    5. George Gissing, New Grub Street, ed. John Goode (Oxford: Oxford
                          University Press, 1998), 459–60.
                    Institutions
                    MAIA MCALEAVEY
                             “To you the British House of Commons is everything.”
                             “Yes;—everything,’ said Mr. Palliser, with unwonted enthusiasm;—
                             everything, everything. That and the Constitution are everything.”
                                                                         — Anthony Trollope, Can You Forgive Her?1
                    I      spent the early months of the Donald Trump administration rereading
                          Anthony Trollope’s Barsetshire and Palliser novels, a self-protective
                    act that at first I understood as a retreat. It was only after former FBI
                    Director James Comey testified before the Senate Intelligence
                    Committee on June 8, 2017 that I realized why Trollope’s signature
                    form—the series of linked novels—felt newly vital: Trollope’s novel
                    sequences tell the story of institutional durability amid cultural upheaval.
                            During the 2016 election, James Comey was responsible both for an
                    investigation into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server and for a
                    subsequent investigation into the Trump campaign’s connection to
                    election-meddling by the Russians. After President Trump abruptly
                    removed Comey from his post at the FBI, Comey was received as a
                    hero on the left, even by those who blamed him for Hillary Clinton’s
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:24, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000712

                                                                                                    I N S T I T U T I O NS          743
              loss. In his much-anticipated testimony before Congress, Comey pre-
              sented himself as a defender of the FBI as an institution, one that
              Trump had described as being in “disarray.” Comey also went further,
              defending institutionality itself: “I worked every day at the FBI to help
              make that great organization better. And I say ‘help’ because I did noth-
              ing alone at the FBI. There are no indispensable people at the FBI. The
              organization’s great strength is that its values and abilities run deep and
              wide. The FBI will be fine without me. . . . This organization and its mis-
              sion will go on long beyond me and long beyond any particular admin-
              istration.”2 Institutional values are fundamentally anti-individualist.
              According to Comey’s account, successful group functioning must limit
              the significance of any particular individual: there can be “no indispens-
              able people” in an institution committed to its mission, or, more cyni-
              cally, committed to its own survival. An institutional timeframe strives
              to extend past “any particular administration,” and any particular career.
              From a narrative perspective, the subordination of an individual’s actions
              to an institution’s continuity requires an unfamiliar temporality and
              character-system. Our heroes, and indeed the Victorians’ heroes, more
              often rage alone against the red tape of Circumlocution Offices and
              Courts of Chancery.
                      A stalwart institutionalist like Comey, speaking on behalf of a smoothly
              functioning system is improbably cast as a hero. Such is also the case (and
              now we come to Trollope), with Plantagenet Palliser, for whom the House
              of Commons and the constitution are “everything, everything.” Trollope
              uses his novel sequences to work through the opposing claims of individu-
              als and institutions. While any one Trollope novel explicitly nominates both
              a hero and a heroine and attentively tracks their progress, Trollope’s novel
              sequences enact Comey’s prescription that in a well-functioning organization
              there can be “no indispensable people.” Trollope’s series “elongat[e]
              time,” as Carolyn Dever puts it, drawing the perspective beyond any single
              character’s focus.3 Taken together—for the two sequences share several
              characters and overlapping place names—Trollope’s Barsetshire and
              Palliser novels encompass a “fictional chronology [that] spans forty-three
              years,” as Frank Robbins calculates.4 By their very design, these
              sequences explore the possibility of placing an institution—rather than
              a protagonist—at the heart of a narrative. Their time scale is expansive
              enough to chronicle how the institutions of the Anglican Church, in
              the Barsetshire Chronicles, and of the British government, in the
              Palliser novels, adapt their traditions to a changing world.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:24, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000712

                    744          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                            Through the narrative form of the series, the Barsetshire and Palliser
                    novels celebrate what Trollope identifies as the central virtues of institution-
                    ality, replaceability and adaptability. Replaceability is a function of time: as
                    years pass, characters age and institutional roles are filled and refilled. As
                    clergymen and politicians are promoted up the ladders of the church
                    and government, others emerge to take their places. Barchester Towers
                    (1857) opens with two vacancies—that occasioned by the death of the
                    Bishop of Barchester (and filled promptly by Bishop Proudie) and that
                    occasioned by the death of Eleanor Bold’s husband (filled, by the novel’s
                    end, by Mr. Arabin). Having played a marriageable maiden in The Warden
                    and a pretty widow in Barchester Towers, Eleanor Arabin reappears as a weal-
                    thy matron in The Last Chronicle of Barset, with Grace Crawley (a toddler
                    when Eleanor married Arabin) now cast as the marriageable girl. The struc-
                    ture might seem tinged with the melancholy of the passage of time were it
                    not for its reassuring, and even procreative, stability. Replaceability favors
                    the fate of the group over the fate of the individual.
                            The novel sequence allows Trollope to attend to institutional change
                    so incremental as to be unnarratable within a single novel, change that is
                    in fact in the service of continuity. Trollope identifies adaptability (rather
                    than steadfastness, as we might expect) as essential to continuity: within
                    institutions, individuals must be adaptable precisely in order to carry on.
                    In Trollope’s world, unchanging stubbornness is the keynote of villains.
                    Intractable characters, like the jealous politician Robert Kennedy in
                    Phineas Finn (1869), are punished with increasing isolation. Trollope’s
                    heroes, by contrast, bend and adjust to the developments they encounter
                    as part of a group. Plantagenet Palliser changes so slowly that to those
                    closest to him he seems to be standing still. His wife flippantly declares,
                    “it seems to me he’s always wrong. . . . He never perceives that everything
                    gets changed every five years.”5 But Palliser’s devotion to institutions
                    ensures that he does in fact remain relevant; by the end of The Duke’s
                    Children, he has embraced an American daughter-in-law in accordance
                    with his son’s belief that “Some years ago it might have been improper
                    that an American girl should be elevated to the rank of an English
                    Duchess; but now all that was altered.”6
                            Trollope uses the form of the novel sequence to enclose the changes
                    of modernity within the protective care of institutional stability. The
                    novel sequence provides a secure framework for change to occur while
                    underscoring the forward-moving—and in that sense progressive—anti-
                    individualism that is at the heart of institutionality. Rather than depict
                    this state of affairs as crushing individuals down, the novel sequence
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:24, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000712

                                                                           I N STI TUTI O NS , LI TERATURE                          745
              allows for individual narrative arcs and even heroism at the level of the
              novel, while attesting to the power of something grander than the indi-
              vidual at the level of the series. As we’re faced anew with the question
              of how to balance a single individual’s disruptive claims against long-
              standing institutional norms, and whether or not to fear a bureaucratic
              “deep state” operating independently of executive power, Trollope’s
              formal negotiations take on fresh power.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Anthony Trollope, Can You Forgive Her? (1864; London: Everyman,
                   1994), 714.
              2. “Full Transcript and Video: James Comey’s Testimony on Capitol
                   Hill,” New York Times, June 8, 2017.
              3. Carolyn Dever, “Trollope, Seriality, and the ‘Dullness’ of Form,”
                   Literature Compass 7, no. 9 (2010): 861–66, 862.
              4. Frank E. Robbins, “Chronology and History in Trollope’s Barset
                   and Parliamentary Novels,” Nineteenth-Century Fiction 5, no. 4 (1951):
                   303–16, 308.
              5. Anthony Trollope, Phineas Redux, (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
                   1991), 278.
              6. Anthony Trollope, The Duke’s Children (Oxford: Oxford University
                   Press, 1991), 488–89.
              Literature
              SARAH ALLISON
                     O begin, if we merely say that literature, in the sense of “written work
              T      valued for superior or lasting artistic merit,”1 has been a major disci-
              plinary shibboleth of the last thirty years and leave the reader to imagine
              an entry on literature as it might have appeared in 1987, or 1993, or
              2005,2 “literature” could then work as a placeholder for debates about
              canonicity and prestige that have since become part of a wider discipli-
              nary self-conception. Here, I suggest that the relevance of the term
              now lies both in its apparent contrast with other forms of writing and
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:24, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000712

