              Keywords
              RACHEL ABLOW AND DANIEL HACK
                    OR most readers of this journal, the term “keywords” will call to mind
              F     Raymond Williams’s Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (1976)
              —a book that is itself largely Victorian in focus. We are happy to pay
              homage to Williams’s great book as the inspiration for this, our inaugural
              issue as editors of Victorian Literature and Culture; however, we have not
              taken his Keywords as our model. Bringing together over one hundred
              mini-essays, this special double-issue of the journal seeks to capture the
              wide range of interests and issues currently animating the field of
              Victorian studies. As such, ours is a collaborative and distributed project,
              with each essay separately authored. Additionally, rather than
              encyclopedia-style entries focused solely on the etymology and historical
              development of important terms and concepts, we invited essays that
              leverage or indeed skip over such accounts in order to stake out a posi-
              tion, promote an agenda, and advocate directions for future research.
              And rather than deciding in advance or by ourselves what keywords to
              include, we asked our contributors to write on terms of their own choos-
              ing. In short, our contributors’ task was to make the case for the impor-
              tance of their chosen terms—an importance determined not necessarily
              by the Victorians’ priorities and preoccupations, but also or instead by
              our own.
                      We recognize, of course, that it is not possible to capture the precise
              contours of the field of Victorian literary and cultural studies (even if, as
              this issue grew, we began to fear that we were constructing a map like the
              one described in Lewis Carroll’s Sylvie and Bruno Concluded, “on the scale
              of a mile to the mile”1). Indeed, we do not mean to suggest that the field
              even has precise contours, since what counts as “Victorian” not only
              changes over time but also at any given moment is subject to geograph-
              ical variation, disciplinary and subdisciplinary differences, and all man-
              ner of contestation. But none of this deprives the concept of Victorian
              studies of its descriptive and heuristic value, let alone its institutional real-
              ity. And while no collection such as this one, however broad, can claim to
              be the sample of an even web, we took several steps to make this issue as
              inclusive and representative as possible: we both issued a general call for
              papers and solicited contributions from scholars based in several
              Victorian Literature and Culture, Vol. 46, No. 3/4, pp. 547–550.
              © Cambridge University Press 2018.
              doi:10.1017/S1060150318000177
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:38:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000177

                    548          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    countries and at all stages of their careers; we not only invited contribu-
                    tors to propose their own keywords but also allowed multiple contributors
                    to write on the same term (thereby adding a topographical dimension to
                    the map); and we encouraged dialogue and collaboration among schol-
                    ars with shared interests. As the lucky first readers of these essays, we have
                    learned a great deal about a great many things, and learned to question a
                    great deal we thought we knew. We have also gained a better sense of the
                    field as a whole.
                            So what is that sense? As one would expect of a mature,
                    long-established field, one sees a great heterogeneity of topics and
                    approaches, but also, less predictably, we are struck by what seems to
                    us a mood of excitement and discovery. It seems plausible to claim
                    that, intellectually, there may never have been a better time to be a
                    Victorianist—even as there may never have been a worse time institution-
                    ally to try to become one. There may be a logic to this grim irony: the
                    constant need to defend the value of one’s scholarly and pedagogical
                    expertise in the face of the imploding academic job market and the
                    broader crisis in the humanities is pernicious as well as potentially
                    demoralizing; however, on the evidence of this issue of VLC alone, it is
                    clear that many Victorianists in a position to do so are responding to
                    these challenges by both recommitting to and rethinking their work as
                    Victorianists, and doing so with a sense of urgency.
                            This felt urgency is not restricted to conditions in the academy. On
                    the contrary. One clear trend visible even in our table of contents, for
                    example, is the explosion of interest in the environment. The reasons
                    for the interest are obvious, involving as they do the coming together
                    of our current state of emergency and the role of the nineteenth century
                    in both creating and considering this emergency. Similar arguments
                    could be made for the interest in terms relating to imperialism, globali-
                    zation, and war. Because of nineteenth-century Britain’s privileged rela-
                    tion to many of these issues, the literature and culture of this period
                    offers a potentially relevant resource for the present moment. We all
                    live on the edge of an abyss, and it is impossible for the work that we
                    do to remain impervious to this fact. This is not to say that these essays
                    are presentist in the sense of claiming a purely instrumental relation to
                    the past. Instead, we see something like a desire for more tools to
                    think with—tools that the literature and culture of the nineteenth cen-
                    tury in certain cases seem able to provide. Suspicion is not dead in
                    these pieces, but instead often exists in productive tension with some-
                    thing like receptiveness—and even, still, curiosity.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:38:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000177

                                                                                                           K E Y WO R D S           549
                      Alongside essays relating to explicitly political issues is a large group
              of essays taking on many of the terms we use to define and describe cul-
              tural artifacts and aesthetic experience. The number of these essays to
              some extent registers the formalist turn in literary studies, but these
              essays tend to resist any easy formalist/historicist dichotomy—as do
              many of the essays keyed to less obviously literary or aesthetic terms.
              Moreover, essays on even the hoariest of keywords (we won’t name
              names), while engaging with and extending an existing tradition of
              inquiry, make the issues raised by those keywords feel newly pressing.
                      Throughout this volume more generally, the rich history of
              Victorian studies is treated variously, sometimes virtually simultaneously,
              in a spirit of indebted appreciation and one of revision or critique. At the
              same time, we are struck by the relative paucity of attention to certain
              topics that have loomed large in the history of the field: gender and sex-
              uality above all, but also (relatedly) concepts associated with the work of
              Michel Foucault. We also note a relative absence of interest in political
              economy. We might begin to explain these omissions with the banal
              observation that the field evolves. But these particular shifts—if indeed
              our large but not 1:1 map is accurate—may be linked to the much-
              ballyhooed turn away from suspicious reading and, relatedly, the increas-
              ing tendency of critics (as noted above) to look to Victorian literature
              and culture itself for theoretical models and resources.
                      Then again, that turn may be overhyped, and our map may not be
              fully accurate. We hope this volume will spark continued exploration of
              these and so very many other questions, and we hope that that discussion
              and debate will continue to find a home in these pages. In that spirit, we
              will note that one of the felt absences just flagged will be addressed, and
              perhaps redressed, by a forthcoming cluster of articles on the future of
              feminist Victorian criticism. We will also treat at greater length the history
              and evolution of the field through a series of retrospective pieces by influ-
              ential, senior figures. For these features and much more, we invite read-
              ers whose appetites are whetted by the wealth of erudition and
              argumentation on display in the following pages to stay tuned.
                                                                          *
              We would like to thank John Maynard and Adrienne Munich, our prede-
              cessors as editors, who established VLC and kept it vibrant for so long. We
              greatly admire the work they have done over the past twenty-six years. We
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:38:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000177

                    550          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    know we have a very hard act to follow, and we are grateful for the gen-
                    erosity with which they have handed over the reins to us.
                                                                             NOTE
                    1. Lewis Carroll, Sylvie and Bruno Concluded (London: Macmillan, 1893),
                          169 (emphasis original).
                    Rachel Ablow is Professor and Chair of English at the University at
                    Buffalo, SUNY, author of Victorian Pain (2017) and The Marriage of
                    Minds: Reading Sympathy in the Victorian Marriage Plot (2007), and editor
                    of The Feeling of Reading: Affective Experience and Victorian Literature (2010).
                    Daniel Hack is Professor of English at the University of Michigan and
                    author of Reaping Something New: African American Transformations of
                    Victorian Literature (2017) and The Material Interests of the Victorian Novel
                    (2005).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:38:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000177

