                                                                           I N STI TUTI O NS , LI TERATURE                          745
              allows for individual narrative arcs and even heroism at the level of the
              novel, while attesting to the power of something grander than the indi-
              vidual at the level of the series. As we’re faced anew with the question
              of how to balance a single individual’s disruptive claims against long-
              standing institutional norms, and whether or not to fear a bureaucratic
              “deep state” operating independently of executive power, Trollope’s
              formal negotiations take on fresh power.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Anthony Trollope, Can You Forgive Her? (1864; London: Everyman,
                   1994), 714.
              2. “Full Transcript and Video: James Comey’s Testimony on Capitol
                   Hill,” New York Times, June 8, 2017.
              3. Carolyn Dever, “Trollope, Seriality, and the ‘Dullness’ of Form,”
                   Literature Compass 7, no. 9 (2010): 861–66, 862.
              4. Frank E. Robbins, “Chronology and History in Trollope’s Barset
                   and Parliamentary Novels,” Nineteenth-Century Fiction 5, no. 4 (1951):
                   303–16, 308.
              5. Anthony Trollope, Phineas Redux, (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
                   1991), 278.
              6. Anthony Trollope, The Duke’s Children (Oxford: Oxford University
                   Press, 1991), 488–89.
              Literature
              SARAH ALLISON
                     O begin, if we merely say that literature, in the sense of “written work
              T      valued for superior or lasting artistic merit,”1 has been a major disci-
              plinary shibboleth of the last thirty years and leave the reader to imagine
              an entry on literature as it might have appeared in 1987, or 1993, or
              2005,2 “literature” could then work as a placeholder for debates about
              canonicity and prestige that have since become part of a wider discipli-
              nary self-conception. Here, I suggest that the relevance of the term
              now lies both in its apparent contrast with other forms of writing and
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000724

                    746          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    in the way different types of literature are distinguished from one
                    another. The Oxford Historical Thesaurus gives twenty-eight entries
                    under headings of “types of literature,” including “highest class” and
                    “inferior,” as well as “satiric,” “folk,” “ancient Latin and Greek,” and so
                    forth. That is, the word “literature” is useful in drawing distinctions not
                    only of value but of genre and provenance. The question about literature
                    in the nineteenth century was often not whether a text was “literature,” but
                    what kind of literature it was. What if the key feature of literature has
                    really only ever been the modifier that precedes it?
                            If “literature” is a word whose main significance might actually lie in
                    the adjectives that qualify it, then the most useful history of the word now
                    accounts for it primarily in terms of the company it keeps. Computational
                    text analysis helps restore this word to nineteenth-century discursive con-
                    texts. In a presentation called “Around the word «littérature»: The
                    English case,” Mark Algee-Hewitt, Ryan Heuser, David McClure, and
                    Franco Moretti developed (effectively) a series of snapshots of discourse
                    from the narrow perspective of a string of characters: l-i-t-e-r-a-t-u-r-e.3
                    Their work lets us see what McClure calls “marquee-level changes in its
                    use,”4 in particular the emergence of the idea of literature as belles lettres
                    traced by Raymond Williams and others,5 and it also draws our attention to
                    the presence of the word in discourses about classicism, pedagogy, and
                    nationalism. That is, literature with its modifiers helps us see past the gen-
                    res we impose, if only by suggestive, implicit contrast. The language in
                    which a text is written, the culture it hails from, or the commercial or ped-
                    agogical context of its circulation might each be considered a top candi-
                    date for the most salient feature of the texts we study, and a distanced
                    perspective on the word lets us see all those uses at once.
                            This particular string of characters helps us read as Linda K. Hughes
                    argues that we should: “sideways, including analysis across genres.”6
                    Though Hughes argues in favor of nondigital methods, I follow Anne
                    DeWitt in suggesting we orient ourselves sideways by using computational
                    methods to develop a picture of the landscape of nineteenth-century dis-
                    course.7 Specifically, that includes nonfictional as well as fictional genres,
                    as the imaginativeness of fiction and poetry emerge by contrast to nonfic-
                    tional genres. The essential terms of this twist on the history of this word
                    are there in Keywords, in which Williams traces “the attempted and often
                    successful specialization of literature to certain kinds of writing.”8
                    Williams’s entry on literature reveals how imaginative writing came to
                    be recognized as literature, “affected by an emphatic definition of appro-
                    priate subject-matter.”9 The key distinction in Williams is between
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000724

                                                                                                       LITERATURE                   747
              imaginative books and the “concepts of writing and communication” they
              seem to exclude, a point that is increasingly relevant institutionally—at
              my university, English and mass communication are separate depart-
              ments, and our program has separate tracks in literature, writing, and
              film and digital media. Conceptually, too, it matters, because establishing
              that “literature” is always a subcategory of a larger body of texts supple-
              ments the sense that students are majoring in specialized imaginative lit-
              erature with a sense that they are being taught to make distinctions,
              broad and subtle, to help organize the mass of texts they encounter.
                      The thing, literature, evokes some of the same cultural crosscurrents
              as the canon debates—arguments about cultural capital, about the rela-
              tion of class and personhood to knowledge, about nationalism and
              imperialism—in nonliterary contexts. By looking for the word every-
              where at once, we can see how it once circulated—and continues to cir-
              culate—more broadly as a way to designate different kinds of writing and
              how it might function to remind us that everything is a text. The other
              definition of literature I’d like us to keep in mind is “non-fictional
              books and writings published on a particular subject.”10 The significance
              of these two notions of the word now to university teaching is evident in a
              search for “literature” on the Open Syllabus Explorer,11 a collection of
              syllabi drawn from across disciplines. As of December 2017, the top
              three most-taught texts with “literature” in the title are an essay on the
              role of contemporary literature in the college curriculum, the Norton
              Anthology of Literature, and a book on the literature review in the social sci-
              ences.12 If we consider that the dust has more or less settled around fights
              about the idea of literariness, taking it up again now becomes a way to see
              past the “irrelevance” of literature in favor of a renewed interest in the
              many kinds of literature that circulated in the nineteenth century and
              that continue to circulate around us today.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. “literature, n.,” OED Online, Oxford University Press, http://ww.
                     oed.com.
                2. Gerald Graff, Professing Literature: An Institutional History (Chicago:
                     University of Chicago Press, 1987); Allan Bloom, The Closing of the
                     American Mind: How Higher Education Has Failed Democracy and
                     Impoverished the Souls of Today’s Students (New York: Simon and
                     Schuster, 1987); Jacques Derrida, Acts of Literature, ed. Derek
                     Attridge (New York: Routledge, 1991); John Guillory, Cultural
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000724

                    748          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                            Capital the Problem of Literary Canon Formation, ACLS Humanities
                            E-Book (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993); Derek
                            Attridge, The Singularity of Literature (London: Routledge, 2004);
                            James F. English, The Economy of Prestige: Prizes, Awards, and the
                            Circulation of Cultural Value (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
                            2005).
                       3.   This presentation, given in May 2016, was one stage of a larger collab-
                            orative project called “‘Literature/Littérature’: History of a Word,”
                            which involves researchers from the Stanford Literary Lab; the
                            Sorbonne, Paris; Loyola University New Orleans; and the Max Planck
                            Institute, Frankfurt.
                       4.   David McClure, e-mail message to author, June 20, 2016.
                       5.   Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society
                            (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985).
                       6.   Linda K. Hughes, “SIDEWAYS!: Navigating the Material(ity) of Print
                            Culture,” Victorian Periodicals Review 47, no. 1 (2014): 1–30, 1–2.
                            Hughes makes an argument for “sequential rather than ‘data min-
                            ing’ approaches to reading periodicals” (2), a framework that
                            describes her method of transforming texts into three-dimensional
                            historical debates, as when she reframes Arnold’s essays on culture
                            as part of a longer conversation.
                       7.   Anne DeWitt, “Advances in the Visualization of Data: The Network of
                            Genre in the Victorian Periodical Press,” Victorian Periodicals Review
                            48, no. 2 (2015): 161–82. DeWitt argues that readers create genre ret-
                            rospectively in 1880s periodicals. She points out that “even the drastic
                            expansion of the canon that Moretti calls for ignores the ‘large mass
                            of facts’ that constitute Victorian print culture, an oversight that
                            becomes all the more problematic given the well-established imbrica-
                            tion of novels with the periodical press” (162).
                       8.   Williams, Keywords, 152 (emphasis mine).
                       9.   Williams, Keywords, 145. “Poetry had been the high skills of writing and
                            speaking in the special context of high imagination; the word could
                            be moved in either direction. Literature, in its C19 sense, repeated
                            this, though excluding speaking,” but in recent years, he adds, “liter-
                            ature and literary . . . have been increasingly challenged by concepts
                            of writing and communication which seek to recover the most active
                            and general senses which the extreme specialization had seemed
                            to exclude” (154). He also notes that “in relation to the past,
                            Carlyle and Ruskin, for example, who did not write novels or
                            poems or plays, belong to English literature” (152).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000724

                                                                                  LITERATURE, LOGISTICS                             749
              10. “literature, n.,” OED Online.
              11. The database is designed to “enable new lines of inquiry into canon
                     formation, the evolution of disciplines, pedagogical change, and
                     institutional history” (“About—The Open Syllabus Project,” http://
                     opensyllabusproject.org/faq).
              12. Thomas H. English, “Contemporary Literature,” South Atlantic
                     Bulletin 5, no. 1 (1939): 1–6; The Norton Anthology of English
                     Literature, 9th ed., ed. M. H. Abrams, Stephen Greenblatt, et al.
                     (New York: Norton, 2012); Chris Hart, Doing a Literature Review:
                     Releasing the Social Science Research Imagination (London: Sage,
                     1998). If one restricts the search to “English,” the third book listed
                     in the results is a reference source: William Harmon’s A Handbook
                     to Literature, 12th ed. (Boston: Pearson, 2011).
              Logistics
              SUSAN ZIEGER
              L      OGISTICS, the art and science of efficiently managing the mobility
                      of things and people, seems a twenty-first century phenomenon,
              associated with global supply chains and their emblem, the shipping con-
              tainer. Logistics manages the flow of production and distribution, reduc-
              ing inventory costs and delivering goods just-in-time; it nimbly adjusts to
              fluctuations and disruptions in the supply chain, whether from under-
              sourced materials, workers’ strikes, or software malfunctions. Though
              the efficient transportation of goods is as old as antiquity, it clearly accel-
              erates after the Industrial Revolution, as part of the famous annihilation
              of space and time at which Victorians marveled. Steamships, steel
              hulls, and refrigerated shipping expanded the volume and variety of
              transportable goods; and modernizing national and international postal,
              telegraph, telephonic, and wireless networks facilitated fast flows of finan-
              cial and commercial information. Moreover, the term logistique was a
              nineteenth-century one; it originally meant the supply of materiel to
              troops in warfare. The Napoleonic Wars made logistics a new area in
              the study of war, on par with strategy and tactics. Military logistics was
              never aloof from the movement of capital in the prehistory of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:44:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000724

