                    766          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                       2. Charles E. Rosenberg, “Foreword,” in Erwin H. Ackerknecht, A Short
                            History of Medicine, Revised and Expanded Edition (Baltimore: Johns
                            Hopkins University Press, 2016), xii.
                       3. Charles Webster as quoted in Dorothy Porter, “The Mission of Social
                            History of Medicine: An Historical View,” Social History of Medicine 7,
                            no. 3 (1995): 351–52 (emphasis original).
                       4. Michel Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical
                            Perception, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (London: Tavistock, 1973).
                            First published 1963.
                       5. Mary Wilson Carpenter, Health, Medicine, and Society in Victorian
                            England (Santa Barbara: Praeger, ABC-CLIO, 2010), 6–7, 13–22,
                            45–51, 151, 157–59.
                       6. Joseph Lister as quoted in M. Anne Crowther and Marguerite
                            W. Dupree, Medical Lives in the Age of Surgical Revolution
                            (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 152.
                       7. Ornella Moscucci, The Science of Woman: Gynaecology and Gender in England
                            1800–1929 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 206.
                       8. Carpenter, Health, 3–4.
                       9. Maria H. Frawley, Invalidism and Identity in Nineteenth-Century Britain
                            (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2004); Carpenter, Health, see espe-
                            cially chap. 4, 5, and 6.
                    10. Joanne Eysell, A Medical Companion to Dickens’s Fiction (Frankfort am
                            Main: Peter Lang, 2005).
                    Melodrama
                    NICHOLAS DALY
                              ELODRAMA ’s critical fortunes took a turn for the better in the
                    M          second half of the twentieth century. Disdained by Victorian crit-
                    ics, and regarded in the early twentieth century as a colorful but crude
                    sideshow to the more significant products of Victorian culture, it was
                    rehabilitated by theatre historians and by literary critics who realized pop-
                    ular theatre’s centrality to nineteenth-century culture more generally.
                    Among the first group were Michael R. Booth and Frank Rahill, who,
                    building on the earlier work of Allardyce Nicoll, created a fuller picture
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:45:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000785

                                                                                                       MELOD RAMA                   767
              of the origins, range, and variety of the nineteenth-century melodramatic
              stage. Booth’s Hiss the Villain: Six English and American Melodramas (1964)
              and English Melodrama (1965); and Rahill’s The World of Melodrama (1967)
              helped to rescue the dominant form of Victorian theatre from the con-
              descension of posterity. Among the second group the name that stands
              out is Peter Brooks, whose The Melodramatic Imagination: Balzac, Henry
              James, Melodrama, and the Mode of Excess (1976) marked an epoch.
              Brooks historicized melodrama as a response to the historical trauma
              of the French Revolution, its polarized world of good and evil filling
              the moral vacuum left by the overthrow of church and monarchy; but
              he also presented melodrama as a transgeneric mode that rippled
              through the nineteenth-century novel. Both of these approaches to melo-
              drama have continued to be fruitful. Our understanding of the popular
              nineteenth-century stage has been enriched by the work of, for instance,
              Jacqueline Bratton, Matthew S. Buckley, Jim Davis, Victor Emaljanow,
              David Mayer, Bruce McConachie, Jane Moody, and Katherine Newey,
              while a vision of melodrama as a mode that floats free of the stage has been
              developed by Elaine Hadley, Ben Singer, and Linda Williams, among others.
              In many respects there has never been a better time to study melodrama.
              Affect theory, for instance, offers us new tools for understanding the emo-
              tional power of melodrama. Perhaps even more importantly, the arrival of
              digital culture has been enormously helpful for anyone trying to work in
              this area. Not only is it possible now to find online versions of obscure
              Victorian plays and memoirs through, for instance, the Internet Archive,
              and to track reviews in national and regional newspapers, but we also enjoy
              open access to some dedicated textual and contextual resources, including
              Jacqueline Bratton’s pilot project on the Lord Chamberlain’s collection;
              Richard Pearson’s Victorian Plays Project at NUI Galway; and the
              University of Massachusetts at Amherst’s Adelphi Theatre Calendar.
              Matthew S. Buckley’s Melodrama Research Consortium promises to bring
              together research on nineteenth-century theatre and work on melodrama’s
              continuing significance within international popular culture.
                      And yet, I cannot help feeling that there is trouble up at t’mill. As
              Matthew S. Buckley has highlighted, nineteenth-century stage melo-
              drama remains the neglected orphan of theatre history, and I would sug-
              gest that things are not much better in the field of Victorian studies.1
              Thus while there has been excellent work on melodrama as a transgene-
              ric mode, and as an alternative public sphere, there are still considerable
              gaps in our knowledge of actual stage melodrama. The success of
              Brooks’s approach has meant that we tend to assume that we already
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:45:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000785

                    768          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    know what melodrama is. As David Mayer, among others, has pointed
                    out, nineteenth-century stage melodrama was “responsive to immediate
                    social circumstances and concerns,” and thus was never a static form, but
                    one that evolved and changed to remain vital.2 So while there are continu-
                    ities across the century, for instance in terms of the form’s emotional
                    impact, there are also breaks. The melodramas of the early century are
                    made of very different stuff to the sensation plays of mid-century, and
                    they are different again to the plays of the 1880s and 1890s. In terms of char-
                    acterization, ethos, and stagecraft there are yawning gaps between Black Ey’d
                    Susan, Douglas Jerrold’s popular nautical play of 1829; The Octoroon, Dion
                    Boucicault’s plantation and riverboat sensation drama of 1859; and
                    Haunted Lives, J. Wilton Jones’s Nihilist play of 1884. They are all melodra-
                    mas, and they all, as it happens, feature ships, but they represent very differ-
                    ent kinds of melodrama. There is still a great deal of work to be done on this
                    variegated field: we now know quite a bit about the earlier phases of British
                    melodrama, and sensation drama has attracted some attention, but our
                    map of the mutations of popular theatre at the end of the century is still
                    far from complete.
                            In terms of what we offer our students, I fear that stage melodrama is
                    more gestured towards than taught, though hopefully there will be a
                    flurry of irate emails to inform me that this is not the case. Anecdotal evi-
                    dence suggests that Victorian survey courses are dominated by novels
                    and, to a lesser extent, poetry and short, non-fiction prose excerpts.
                    (For that matter my impression is that the Victorian survey itself is
                    being edged out by surveys of the nineteenth-century novel.) If a play
                    is taught it is likely to be Oscar Wilde’s The Importance of Being Earnest,
                    which makes it into both the Norton Anthology of English Literature,
                    volume 2, and the Broadview Anthology of British Literature, volume 5,
                    though the latter does also contain The Octoroon. While this neglect
                    may derive from the division of intellectual labor that sometimes
                    makes English and Drama departments distant kin, it may also have to
                    do with the perception that melodrama does not lend itself to close tex-
                    tual analysis. Certainly this neglect is difficult to explain in terms of the
                    availability of texts: as noted above, reliable editions of many Victorian
                    plays are available free online.
                            Overall I think that there is still more reason to cheer than to hiss
                    about melodrama’s place in Victorian studies. But given that it was the
                    dominant form on the nineteenth-century stage, and that it became a
                    major source for, and component within, contemporary international
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:45:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000785

                                                                                                       MELOD RAMA                   769
              popular culture, our students might like to learn a little more about it,
              and I suspect that there is still plenty for us to learn too.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Matthew S. Buckley, “Refugee Theatre: Melodrama and Modernity’s
                   Loss,” Theatre Journal 61, no. 2 (2009): 175–90.
              2. David Mayer, “Encountering Melodrama,” in Victorian and Edwardian
                   Theatre, ed. Kerry Powell (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
                   2004), 145–63, 146.
              Melodrama
              CAROLYN WILLIAMS
              I     have been arguing recently that we need to pay more attention to
                   melodramatic form. Currently no comprehensive account of it exists.
              I have suggested that we should focus on the way the dramatic action is
              interrupted by still pictures, the tableaux, and, correlatively, on the way
              the music starts and stops, segmenting the dramatic action into “pas-
              sages.” (Even when the music is nearly continuous, it swells and recedes
              in volume, calibrated so that the actors’ declamations can be heard; and
              thus, even when fairly continuous, the music participates in the formal
              segmentation of the action.) This way of thinking hypothesizes an audio-
              visual field for analysis, constituted by dialectical relations between dra-
              matic action and pictorial representation; movement and stillness;
              speech and music; sound and silence. The relative strength of this
              method will be tested through the readings it can generate and support.
                      I’m not the first to concentrate on the interruptive nature of melodra-
              ma’s genre form. Juliet John has stipulated: “the emotional economy of
              melodrama is best figured as a series of waves.”1 Martin Meisel drew a formal
              analogy between melodrama, painting, and novels of the nineteenth cen-
              tury; he called their shared narrative form “serial discontinuity” and empha-
              sized the pictorial dramaturgy of the nineteenth-century stage overall.2
              Recently, Ellen Lockhart has attended to melodrama’s “stuttering” form,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:45:00, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000785

