                                                                          O R GAN I C I SM , P E R FO R M A N CE                    795
                   Novel,” presented at the “Form and Reform” Conference, University
                   of California, Santa Cruz, July 28, 2017.
              6. Raymond Williams, The Country and the City (Oxford: Oxford
                   University Press, 1973), 180; Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and
                   Society (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976), 228.
              7. Leonard T. Hobhouse, Liberalism and Other Writings (Cambridge:
                   Cambridge University Press, 1994), 35.
              8. See Harold Perkin, Origins of Modern English Society (London:
                   Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969), 244.
              Performance
              LAUREN ERIKS CLINE
              W         HAT is Victorian about our world stage? While the criminalization
                        of poverty, the corruption of bureaucracies, and the upward redis-
              tribution of wealth has put many observers in mind of a Dickens novel,
              we might also consider a less-studied Victorian object: the spectacle.
              Take 2017. In the same year that 20th Century Fox released The Greatest
              Showman, a movie dramatizing the life of nineteenth-century circus
              impresario P. T. Barnum, political pundits also scrutinized the stunts of
              a more contemporary media figure, whose “circus-like ‘style,’” seems
              part of his “showman’s reality-TV approach to the presidency.”1 The dra-
              matic genre of the day, according to this critic, is not a Jacobean tragedy
              or even a pièce du théâtre de l’absurde, but a visually excessive, nineteenth-
              century extravaganza. If there’s something showy about the state of play,
              in other words, there’s also something Victorian about the methods of
              performance. So, what can the Victorians—who lived through what
              Tracy C. Davis and Peter Holland call “the performing century”—tell
              us about how to bear witness to the Greatest Show on Earth?2
                      For starters, nineteenth-century performance provides a privileged
              site for analyzing the power of loosely scripted spectacles. Many theater
              practitioners in Victorian London were at least as interested in exploring
              the affordances of new stage technologies as they were in dramatizing a
              particular literary text.3 A fascination with visually arresting pageantry or
              exciting musical numbers was even more operative in the minor theaters,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000864

                    796          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    where audiences sought out less text-dependent forms of entertainment
                    in burlesques, melodramas, pantomimes, farces, and freak shows. It is
                    perhaps for this reason that so many drama syllabi skip from Sheridan
                    to Shaw, and so many Victorian literature courses prefer to limit their
                    dramatic texts to later works by Oscar Wilde. As Sharon Marcus notes,
                    “most Victorianists prefer studying durable works by well-known authors
                    to reconstructing the ephemeral work of acting, and have little interest in
                    theater that elevated performers over authors.”4
                            Yet the very qualities that deterred some previous scholars might
                    entice today’s critics to look more closely at Victorian performance—
                    and particularly at Victorian spectatorship. Since spectating in the nine-
                    teenth century called on visual and auditory savvy as much as on textual
                    hermeneutics, Victorian audiences model how witnesses make meaning
                    of a performance culture in which words don’t always carry the expected
                    weight. And fortunately for us, these spectators often left behind records
                    of their meaning-making techniques. In addition to the theatrical scrap-
                    books, cabinet photos, and program collections analyzed by scholars like
                    Marcus,5 the nineteenth century also saw a boom in print narratives
                    about performance, which were published in memoirs, diaries, letters,
                    and essays.6 While these texts don’t always provide theater historians
                    with conclusive evidence about what happened on Victorian stages,
                    they do offer valuable insight into how audiences interpreted and con-
                    structed the significance of those happenings. Understanding how audi-
                    ences and actors use print accounts of performance to focalize attention,
                    construct characters, and sequence events gives researchers a sense of
                    how performance meanings take discursive shape.
                            This approach also offers a new way to put work on Victorian perfor-
                    mance in conversation with work on the Victorian novel.7 How did
                    Victorian audiences make use of the nineteenth-century proliferation
                    of plot structures to craft narratives of theater history?8 Do theories of
                    transfictional character help explain how audiences write about
                    “Hamlet” or “Sarah Bernhardt” as figures whose qualities remain recog-
                    nizable across a series of performances and texts? How do spectators ren-
                    der their point of view in print? Do they tend to adopt the
                    characteristically nineteenth-century perspective of omniscience, or do
                    they turn to more embodied points of view that allow for the representa-
                    tion of limitation or partiality?9
                            By analyzing the techniques that audiences use to narrate spectator-
                    ship, Victorianists can learn about the mechanics of turning shows into
                    stories: into the cultural narratives that compete to shape the meaning
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000864

                                                                                                   P E R FO R M A N C E             797
              of cultural performances. In this letter from Charles Dickens to John
              Forster, for example, Dickens attempts to influence how his reader will
              understand the sexual politics of a burlesque performance by the
              young Marie Wilton:
                      I really wish you would go, between this and next Thursday, to see the Maid
                      and the Magpie burlesque there. There is the strangest thing in it that ever I
                      have seen on the stage—the boy Pippo, by Miss Wilton. While it is astonish-
                      ingly impudent (must be, or it couldn’t be done at all), it is so stupendously
                      like a boy, and unlike a woman, that it is perfectly free from offence. I never
                      have seen such a thing. She does an imitation of the dancing of the Christy
                      Minstrels—wonderfully clever—which, in the audacity of its thorough-going,
                      is surprising. A thing that you cannot imagine a woman’s doing at all; and yet
                      the manner, the appearance, the levity, impulse, and spirits of it, are so
                      exactly like a boy, that you cannot think of anything like her sex in associa-
                      tion with it.10
               In this account, the characteristically strong “I-you” relationship on which
              epistolary narrative depends also creates the conditions for a reciprocal
              reception of performance: what “I have seen” or “have never seen” sets
              the bounds of what “you cannot imagine” and “cannot think of.” What
              Dickens attempts to set outside the boundaries of the thinkable is osten-
              sibly an “offensive” hybridity of sex and gender. But there are further acts
              of hybridity that the narrative aims to make even less imaginable.
              Although Wilton’s imitation of the dancing of the Christy Minstrels—
              themselves appropriators of an imagined repertoire of African
              American performance—is the act Dickens narrates, he has displaced
              possible transgressions of racial and national identity onto the axes of
              gender and sex. This displacement is not necessarily evidence of what
              Dickens does not see, but rather a way that Dickens’s narrative makes cer-
              tain performance meanings more or less visible to his readers.
                      A robust field of Victorian performance studies may thus be partic-
              ularly critical for understanding how a political circus shapes and is
              shaped by shifting categories of gender, race, class, disability, and nation-
              ality. The Greatest Show on Earth, after all, made a spectacle out of
              bodily difference in a way that might feel uncomfortably familiar to
              those analyzing the performances of masculinity and white identity pol-
              itics involved in a “showman’s reality-TV approach to the presidency.”
              If witnessing the events of 2017 and 2018 can feel like watching the
              past repeat itself, where better to look than to performance? As a
              mode that makes meaning through repetition, performance has much
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000864

                    798          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    to tell us about the embodied and ideological roots of our own “twice-
                    behaved behavior.”11
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. John Avalon, “Trump’s War On Truth—And How We Can Fight It,”
                            The Daily Beast, December 27, 2017, www.thedailybeast.com/the-year-
                            in-freedom-of-the-press
                       2. Tracy C. Davis and Peter Holland, eds., The Performing Century:
                            Nineteenth-Century Theatre’s History (New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
                            2008).
                       3. Sir Theodore Martin, for example, blamed the painstakingly anti-
                            quarian Shakespeare productions of Charles Kean for encouraging
                            a public “appetite for costly scenic effects” (Martin, Essays on the
                            Drama [London: Printed for Private Circulation, 1874], 83).
                       4. Sharon Marcus, “Victorian Theatrics: Response,” Victorian Studies 54,
                            no. 3 (Spring 2012): 438–70, 439.
                       5. Marcus provides both a guide to theatrical scrapbooks and an argu-
                            ment for taking them seriously as an archive in “The Theatrical
                            Scrapbook,” Theatre Survey 54, no. 2 (2013): 283–307.
                       6. See Jacky Bratton, New Readings in Theatre History (Cambridge:
                            Cambridge University Press, 2003), 95.
                       7. Scholars like Joseph Litvak, Emily Allen, and David Kurnick have
                            argued persuasively for the connections between theater and the
                            novel in the nineteenth century. Here, I advocate for a reversal of
                            critical traffic (from “what can theater tell us about the novel?” to
                            “what can narrative tell us about theater writing?”) that would com-
                            plement these earlier studies. See Litvak, Caught in the Act:
                            Theatricality in the Nineteenth-Century English Novel (Berkeley:
                            University of California Press, 1992); Allen, Theater Figures: The
                            Production of the Nineteenth-Century British Novel (Columbus: Ohio
                            State University Press, 2003); and Kurnick, Empty Houses: Theatrical
                            Failure and the Novel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011).
                       8. Richard Schoch’s recent monograph, Writing the History of the British
                            Stage: 1660–1900 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016),
                            sets the stage for this question by reading Victorian theater histories
                            (against the grain) as serious historiographical efforts.
                       9. Lauren Eriks Cline, “‘Mere Lookers-On at Life’: Point of View and
                            Spectator Narrative,” forthcoming in Nineteenth Century Theatre and
                            Film.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000864

                                                                                 PE RFORMANCE, PO ETE SS                            799
              10. Quoted in Marie Bancroft, Gleanings from “On And Off the Stage”
                     (London: George Routledge and Sons, Ltd., 1892), 55–56 (emphasis
                     original).
              11. Richard Schechner, Between Theater & Anthropology (Philadelphia:
                     University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985).
              Poetess
              TRICIA LOOTENS
              W         HO made the Victorian Poetess white? No one; not ever. The
                        pre-Victorian historical career of Phillis Wheatley; the fictional
              life of Germaine de Staël’s 1795 Senegalese poet Mirza;1 the public
              career of nineteenth-century African-American poet, novelist, and orator
              Frances E. W. Harper; even the present-day currency of “Black Poetess” as
              a vital category of African-American poetic performance: as all these tes-
              tify, the popular life of Victorian feminine poetry moves in part through
              figures and figurations of the Black Poetess. Indeed, positioned as she
              has long been at the imaginary “heart” of “separate spheres,” the mythic
              Poetess, including the Black Poetess, now invites rereading both as autho-
              rized literary agent and mythic inhabitant of that shockingly resilient,
              albeit historically implausible, fantasy space, the “private sphere.” For
              Poetess performance remains, as it has always been, explosively unstable,
              bitterly contested, and expressly political. To confront the inseparability
              of “Poetess”/ “Black Poetess,” then, might serve as a means both to invite
              and incite new readings of the transatlantic, transnational, and even tran-
              simperial ambitions of Victorian literary culture.2
                      To compose poetry as a Victorian woman was, by definition, to con-
              front the prospect of adopting, accepting, or even being unwillingly
              assigned the title of “poetess.” It was as “Woman,” after all, that public
              Poetess performers stepped forward, thus entering a rich, troubling com-
              pany poised (and posed) at the boundaries of history and fantasy.
              Sappho, juxtaposed with mythology’s Philomela and Procne, no less
              than the Pythia; Felicia Dorothea Hemans, paired with Germaine de
              Staël’s Corinne or Maria Jane Jewsbury’s Egeria no less than Letitia
              Elizabeth Landon or Lydia Huntley Sigourney (the “American
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000864

