                                                                                 PE RFORMANCE, PO ETE SS                            799
              10. Quoted in Marie Bancroft, Gleanings from “On And Off the Stage”
                     (London: George Routledge and Sons, Ltd., 1892), 55–56 (emphasis
                     original).
              11. Richard Schechner, Between Theater & Anthropology (Philadelphia:
                     University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985).
              Poetess
              TRICIA LOOTENS
              W         HO made the Victorian Poetess white? No one; not ever. The
                        pre-Victorian historical career of Phillis Wheatley; the fictional
              life of Germaine de Staël’s 1795 Senegalese poet Mirza;1 the public
              career of nineteenth-century African-American poet, novelist, and orator
              Frances E. W. Harper; even the present-day currency of “Black Poetess” as
              a vital category of African-American poetic performance: as all these tes-
              tify, the popular life of Victorian feminine poetry moves in part through
              figures and figurations of the Black Poetess. Indeed, positioned as she
              has long been at the imaginary “heart” of “separate spheres,” the mythic
              Poetess, including the Black Poetess, now invites rereading both as autho-
              rized literary agent and mythic inhabitant of that shockingly resilient,
              albeit historically implausible, fantasy space, the “private sphere.” For
              Poetess performance remains, as it has always been, explosively unstable,
              bitterly contested, and expressly political. To confront the inseparability
              of “Poetess”/ “Black Poetess,” then, might serve as a means both to invite
              and incite new readings of the transatlantic, transnational, and even tran-
              simperial ambitions of Victorian literary culture.2
                      To compose poetry as a Victorian woman was, by definition, to con-
              front the prospect of adopting, accepting, or even being unwillingly
              assigned the title of “poetess.” It was as “Woman,” after all, that public
              Poetess performers stepped forward, thus entering a rich, troubling com-
              pany poised (and posed) at the boundaries of history and fantasy.
              Sappho, juxtaposed with mythology’s Philomela and Procne, no less
              than the Pythia; Felicia Dorothea Hemans, paired with Germaine de
              Staël’s Corinne or Maria Jane Jewsbury’s Egeria no less than Letitia
              Elizabeth Landon or Lydia Huntley Sigourney (the “American
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000876

                    800          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Hemans”); Wheatley, even, shadowed by Staël’s Mirza: such figures helped
                    people a Victorian cultural dream space whose authority claims promised
                    to exceed those of mere mortal, historical existence. Indeed, even at the
                    century’s end, to publish poetry under a woman’s name was to risk being
                    assimilated to the warring company of, say, William Makepeace
                    Thackeray’s Lady Jane Sheepshanks; Elizabeth Barrett Browning’s
                    Aurora Leigh; Christina Rossetti’s Maude; or even Mark Twain’s
                    Emmeline Grangerford: for “poetess,” whether deployed in dismissive, cel-
                    ebratory, or apparently neutral terms, remained an active category.
                            Active—and accessible: for as Alfred Tennyson, much less William
                    Sharp (“Fiona Macleod”), famously dramatized, the challenge of per-
                    forming (as) “Woman” remained open to all. Not “the content of her
                    own generic representation; not a speaker, not an ‘I,’ not a conscious-
                    ness, not a subjectivity, not a voice, not a persona, not a self,”3 the mythic
                    Poetess was, after all, less a heroine than a heritage: “a ‘trope, available
                    for occupancy’ yet also advertising its vacancy.”4 “Adoption of the mask
                    of the improvisatrice”; “insistence that love and the domestic affections
                    are primary to a woman’s happiness”; “rejection or condemnation of
                    poetic fame”; “embracing of Edmund Burke’s aesthetic of the beautiful
                    as the goal of female literary desire”: these were her defining require-
                    ments—along with “acceptance of the hegemonic doctrine of separate
                    spheres.”5 For in practice, the Poetess’s vacancy has always been clearly
                    positioned. Policed, however tacitly, by the defining claims of unmarked,
                    uncontested whiteness, Englishness, gentility, chastity, heterosexuality,
                    and orthodox Christian faith, hers remains an imaginary realm whose
                    historically untenable “doctrine” continues, even now, to shape accounts
                    of “the Victorian”—and with them, intransigently racialized, histrioni-
                    cally apolitical post-Victorian fantasies of national innocence.
                            Open secret: Poetess performance has always been thoroughly pub-
                    lic. Even as a space of cliché, the Poetess’s “private sphere” acts as staging-
                    ground for displays of “secret” sorrows: intimate mourning, anguish, and
                    suicidal despair. For generations, mere reference to such Poetess
                    stocks-in-trade invited a highly particular merging of political and formal
                    abjection: a comfortable indulgence in nostalgia, mockery, and con-
                    tempt. With early Second Wave feminism, this changed. Polemical
                    accounts of “the personal” as “political”; insistence on the potentially vio-
                    lent instabilities, even of the “private sphere” as stereotype: these helped
                    spark an ongoing revolution in sentimental poetic reading. As critical
                    “Keep-off” signs begin to fall, visions of naïve “lack of originality” may
                    resolve into views of bravura citationality; “artificiality” may become
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000876

                                                                                                               PO E T E SS          801
              “artifice.” Indeed, the very “gush” itself now seems, to many, increasingly
              legible as a figure for calculated, corporealized affective force.6 What are
              Poetess poetics? We are, by now, beginning to ask—and to ask, in part, by
              moving both through and beyond long-familiar accounts of “separate”
              (or, more accurately, suspended) spheres, straight towards the very
              “heart” of a great (and guilt-ridden) “anti-slavery empire.”7 Who is
              “Woman,” as she is invoked within struggles to define this always violently
              unstable, historically implausible visionary heart/hearth/home? Even to
              pose such a question is to underscore the Poetess’s claims as a figure of
              transatlantic, transnational, and, indeed, transimperial contestation.
              Black Poetess: as touchstone and flashpoint for fantasies of a globally
              expanding “free” (and, indeed, liberatory) British home, hers is a figure
              we have long occluded—and one we cannot, now, afford to forget.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Germaine de Staël, “Mirza, or Letters of a Traveler,” in Translating
                   Slavery: Gender and Race in French Women’s Writing, 1783–1823, trans.
                   Françoise Massardier-Kenney, ed. Doris Y. Kadish and Françoise
                   Massardier-Kenney (Kent: Kent State University Press, 1994), 146–57.
              2. Tricia Lootens, The Political Poetess: Victorian Femininity, Race, and the Legacy
                   of Separate Spheres (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017), 1–19.
              3. Virginia Jackson and Yopie Prins, “Lyrical Studies,” Victorian Literature
                   and Culture 27, no. 2 (1999): 521–30, 523.
              4. Yopie Prins, Victorian Sappho (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
                   1999), 180.
              5. Anne K. Mellor, “Distinguishing the Poetess from the Female Poet,” in
                   Approaches to Teaching British Women Poets of the Romantic Period, ed.
                   Stephen C. Behrendt and Harriet Kramer Linkin (New York:
                   Modern Language Association of America, 1997), 63–68, 64.
              6. See, in this context, Isobel Armstrong, Victorian Poetry: Poetry, Poetics
                   and Politics (New York: Routledge, 1993), 318–77.
              7. See, for example, Catherine Hall, Nicholas Draper, Keith McClelland,
                   Katie Donington, and Rachel Lang, Legacies of British Slave-Ownership:
                   Colonial Slavery and the Formation of Victorian Britain (Cambridge:
                   Cambridge University Press, 2014); Richard Huzzey, Freedom Burning:
                   Anti-Slavery and Empire in Victorian Britain (Ithaca: Cornell University
                   Press, 2012).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000876

