                    802          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Poetry
                    MEREDITH MARTIN
                             Our sense of what ‘poetry’ means will probably be changed by the internet
                             just as surely as our conception of the “Victorian” will be changed. The first
                             because we will locate poetry and theories of poetry . . . in ‘unofficial’ class
                             and gender contexts, British and American. Poetry in Eliza Cook’s Journal will
                             look different than the poetry published by, say, The Monthly Repository or in
                             Scribner’s. The second because we will probe “unofficial” history as well. . . .
                             [W]e will undo the very notion of a central, dominant historical narrative
                             for the nineteenth century.
                                                                 —Isobel Armstrong, “The Victorian Poetry Party”1
                    S      INCE the last moment of self-reflection in 2004, when Isobel
                            Armstrong wrote this passage, scholars have, indeed, been overturn-
                    ing the very idea of “poetry” as anything like a unified subject in the
                    Victorian era thanks, in large part, to research afforded by online
                    archives. From the adjectives that might describe a poem (sweet, uplift-
                    ing, smooth, mournful, delicate, song-like, marching) to the terms
                    (meter, rhythm, tone, pitch, voice, cadence, sound, sense) to the genres
                    in the back of our Norton Anthology (epic, ballad, song, ode, lesser ode,
                    elegy, lyric, parody, dirge, sonnet), contemporary scholarship on
                    Victorian poetry has become a wildly contested field that now questions
                    not only the stability of most of the words I list above, but has also come
                    to question the once-believed distinctions between so-called literary and
                    popular forms. Moreover, we are reading nineteenth-century poems in
                    transatlantic and global contexts of circulation and exchange. These con-
                    texts have pushed us, finally, to be wary of that age-old tendency to apply
                    (those very Victorian) progress narratives to English poetry and English
                    poetic form, or to follow the well-worn ideologies of poetry’s civilizing
                    power. Though there are exceptions, the move contemporary scholars
                    are making when they encounter Victorian poetry, wherever they
                    might find it, is to view it from several angles at once. First, scholars
                    are questioning the narratives of how we should read Victorian poems,
                    how and why we have been taught to read them in the ways that we
                    have. We see how scholars of the twentieth century have read back
                    onto the wildly heterogeneous and geographically immense world of
                    nineteenth-century poetry in ways that have limited horizons and have
                    curtailed certain questions. New work in nineteenth-century poetry
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000888

                                                                                                                 POE T RY           803
              thinks broadly about poetry, its readers, and the ways it conditioned its
              readers—readers of all genders, races, and countries—to read.
                      Why this turn toward reception? Though scholars of the history of
              poetics like the late T. V. F. Brogan began the laborious work of reading
              through and cataloguing the thousands of works that fell out of the reg-
              ular canon of literary history as early as the 1980s, the availability of dig-
              ital archives in the past ten years has accelerated the contemporary
              re-examination about Victorian media, print, and format to an astound-
              ing degree. A scholar of “poetry” in the Victorian era can now quickly
              search across millions of pages beyond single volumes in library cata-
              logues in order to think through how “poetry” was used in non-literary
              contexts, complicating and querying long-held hierarchies between
              “verse” and “poetry” or the older distinctions between “poetry” and
              “prose.” Scholars have used distant reading technology to show how
              the cultural currency of the word “meter” across the Victorian era inter-
              sected with both enthusiasm and dismay over the idea of English national
              culture or to survey how technology may make the perfectly educated
              human ear obsolete in evaluating a poetic line.2 And by opening up
              what was once thought of as purely literary, we are now reading
              Coleridge as not only a poet and critic but also a journalist, we are tracing
              poems across reprints and continents, and we are reading the long can-
              onized poets of the Victorian era as well as newly canonized poets like
              Toru Dutt as deeply embedded in a global network of circulation, imita-
              tion, and parody.3 Though scholars have long been exploring global
              Anglophone poetry, questions of education, cultural appropriation,
              and translation are now central to discussions of poetic form and
              national identity in England and the colonies.4 And English poetry
              now means a richer and deeper examination of the communities that
              wrote and read poems—from Chartists to working class poems in
              Scotland, to the influence of the Bible on how Victorians read poetry
              to the generic forces of melodrama and musicals, opera and art-songs,
              visual art and tableau. Each of these sub-fields developed and maintained
              its own sense of a poetics—a poetics as reading practice that has compli-
              cated and enriched our understanding of the period.5 What was once
              held apart as “the aesthetic” is now fundamentally historical in our
              understanding of the nineteenth-century; historiography, as a Victorian
              invention, is embedded in our understanding of the development of
              Victorian aesthetics.6
                      We are now reconsidering poetry published across various periodi-
              cals and newspapers alongside volumes of poems in circulation, and we
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000888

                    804          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    are also reconsidering where and how serious discussions of poetics were
                    taking place. We have turned to previously unexamined literary histories;
                    introductions to poetry; widely reprinted grammar books whose exam-
                    ples might become canonical; manuals of rhetoric; guides to elocution;
                    introductions to the English language; newspapers with reviews that crit-
                    icize the poetic technique of another poet or offer a new reading; reviews
                    of prosody handbooks, manuals, and treatises; in addition to the hand-
                    books, manuals, and treatises themselves; introductions to individual
                    poets that include explanations of the poet’s prosody; and parodies, col-
                    lections of parodies, and histories of prosody. Until recently, this kind of
                    material didn’t seem to count in the history of poetic form. Rather than
                    see only one or two Victorian critics of poetry (Mill, Arnold) defining the
                    field, we now see Victorian poetic theory as richer and more various;
                    scholars who were once thought to have been the most influential are
                    now read in the much broader context of a culture that used poems
                    and poetry to appeal to several kinds of audiences at once and disagreed
                    fervently about what counted as poetry. Victorian readers were canny
                    connoisseurs of genre; the nineteenth-century, that great era of evolving
                    taxonomies, produced poets who knew the suppleness of generic catego-
                    ries—this we already knew. What we now understand is how generically
                    conditioned Victorian readers were to apprehend the mixing, upending,
                    and manipulating of the poems they read. Contemporary critics must no
                    longer read anachronistically, back-projecting our current ideas about
                    poetry onto an imagined Victorian reader. Scholars of nineteenth-
                    century poetry (and by implication, readers of poems in any period)
                    must rethink the social, institutional, and generic histories that have gov-
                    erned the reading of poetry then and now, including the determinations
                    for what counts as poetry worth reading.7 Historical poetics both broad-
                    ens and deepens our understanding of the poetic canon and English lit-
                    erature as a discipline, providing for scholars of poetry what many of the
                    newer discoveries about canonicity have provided to scholars of prose—a
                    sense that expanding our archive destabilizes inherited notions about
                    genre, and a sense that we might begin to trace the contours of how
                    those inherited notions came to be passed down to us in, and as, a disci-
                    pline. And it expands the archive of Victorian poetry in crucial ways that
                    are difficult to navigate—by seriously considering paratextual materials,
                    histories of circulation and reading, and other influences on poetic dis-
                    course. Whether we bring all of these to bear on our close readings of
                    nineteenth-century poetry matters less than the fact that our vision of
                    the archive, the material, and the genre of any particular poem is not
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000888

                                                                                                                 POE T RY           805
              taken for granted as stable or exhaustive, nor is our own critical vantage
              point a place that can go unexamined.
                      In the essays marshaled in the two-volume, field-stating Victorian
              Poetry special issues, edited by Linda K. Hughes, Armstrong noted that
              the only category missing seemed to be race, and the ability to join cul-
              tural studies to textual studies. Armstrong predicted that cultural and tex-
              tual studies would be more and more intertwined, but nowhere other
              than in a brief mention of Jason Rudy’s essay did she see how an expan-
              sionist view of the field could be compatible with intense formal study.
              But that is precisely what Rudy’s 2004 essay augured for the field—a
              responsibility to view Victorian poetry and poetics in a global history of
              circulation, keeping close track of how the categories of gender, class,
              and race were not only understood in nineteenth-century contexts but
              often embedded into the contours of the verses themselves.8
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Isobel Armstrong, “The Victorian Poetry Party,” Victorian Poetry 42,
                   no. 1 (2004): 9–28.
              2. T. V. F. Brogan, English Versification: 1570–1980: A Reference Guide with a
                   Global Appendix (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981);
                   Meredith Martin, The Rise and Fall of Meter: Poetry and English
                   National Culture: 1860–1930 (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
                   2012); and Jason David Hall, Nineteenth-Century Verse and Technology:
                   Machines of Meter (New York, London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017).
              3. Meredith McGill, ed., The Traffic in Poems: Nineteenth-Century Poetry
                   and Transatlantic Exchange (New Brunswick: Rutgers University
                   Press, 2008), and American Literature and the Culture of Reprinting
                   1834–1853 (2003; Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
                   2007). Her argument is expanded by Ryan Cordell and David
                   Smith’s Viral Texts project, viraltexts.org; Jason Rudy, Imagined
                   Homelands: British Poetry and the Colonies (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
                   University Press, 2017); Tricia Lootens, The Political Poetess: Victorian
                   Femininity, Race, and the Legacy of Separate Spheres (Princeton:
                   Princeton University Press, 2017).
              4. Heidi Thompson, Coleridge and the Romantic Newspaper: The “Morning
                   Post” and the Road to “Dejection” (New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
                   2016); Yopie Prins, Ladies’ Greek: Translations of Tragedy (Princeton:
                   Princeton University Press, 2017); Annmarie Drury, Translation as
                   Transformation in Victorian Poetry (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000888

                    806          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                          Press, 2015); Mary Ellis Gibson, Indian Angles: English Verse in Colonial
                          India from Jones to Tagore (Athens: Ohio University Press, 2011).
                    5.    Margaret Loose, The Chartist Imaginary: Literary Form in Working-Class
                          Political Theory and Practice (Columbus: Ohio State University Press,
                          2016); Kirstie Blair, The Poets of the People’s Journal: Newspaper Poetry in
                          Victorian Scotland (Glasgow: Association for Scottish Literary Studies,
                          2016), Working Verse in Victorian Scotland: Poetry, Press, Community (forth-
                          coming), and Form and Faith in Victorian Poetry and Religion (Oxford:
                          Oxford University Press, 2012); Charles LaPorte, Victorian Poets and the
                          Changing Bible (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2011);
                          Carolyn Williams, Gilbert and Sullivan: Gender, Genre, Parody
                          (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011); Justin Sider,
                          “‘Modern-Antiques,’ Ballad Imitation, and the Aesthetics of
                          Anachronism,” Victorian Poetry 54, no. 4 (2016): 455–75.
                    6.    Carolyn Williams, Transfigured World (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
                          1990); Justin Sider “Aesthetic Categories and the Social Life of Genre
                          in Victorian Criticism,” Victorian Studies 59, no. 3 (2017): 450–56;
                          Naomi Levine, “Elizabeth Barrett Browning’s Historiographical
                          Poetics,” Modern Language Quarterly 77, no. 1 (2016): 81–104; and
                          Naomi Levine, “Tirra-Lirrical Ballads: Source Hunting with the Lady
                          of Shalott,” Victorian Poetry 54, no. 4 (2016): 439–54.
                    7.    See historicalpoetics.com for a full discussion.
                    8.    Jason Rudy, “On Cultural Neoformalism, Spasmodic Poetry, and the
                          Victorian Ballad,” Victorian Poetry 41, no. 4 (2003): 590–96.
                    Politics
                    MARK ALLISON
                                                                    A PROLEGOMENON
                    I     want to approach this vexed subject indirectly. Consider the following
                          events:
                             • 24 March 1832: Edward Bulwer [Lytton] votes for the Reform
                                 Bill, which passes the House of Commons.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000888

