                    812          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    have been criticized by humanists as well as statisticians, his work is a testa-
                    ment to our tremendous appetite for progress narratives, one that certainly
                    exceeds in quantity and differs in quality from the modest claims of
                    Macaulay or Acton. As we strive to understand historical change that has
                    a more ambivalent direction and as we fight for the future that we want,
                    we need to acknowledge the way that the Victorian theorization of progress
                    went hand-in-hand with its others—regress, cyclicality, stasis, and rupture.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History (London: G. Bell
                          and Sons, 1963), 4; Michael Bentley, “Shape and Pattern in British
                          Historical Writing, 1815–1945,” in The Oxford History of Historical
                          Writing, 1800–1945, Vol. 4, ed. Stuart Macintyre, Juan Maiguashca,
                          and Attila Pók (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), 208.
                    2. John Stuart Mill, A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, Being a
                          Connected View of the Principles of Evidence and the Methods of Scientific
                          Investigation, in The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, ed. J. M. Robson
                          (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1963), 8: 938 [VI. xi. 3].
                    3. Thomas Babington Macaulay, “History,” in Critical, Historical, and
                          Miscellaneous Essays (New York: Hurd and Houghton, 1878), 1: 393.
                    4. Macaulay, “History,” 416, 417.
                    5. John Emerich Edward Dalberg-Acton, “The Study of History,” in
                          Selected Writings of Lord Acton, ed. J. Rufus Fears (Indianapolis:
                          Liberty Classics, 1985): 2: 517 (emphasis added).
                    6. Dalberg-Acton, “Study,” 507.
                    7. Dalberg-Acton, “Study,” 508–10.
                    8. Steven Pinker, The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined
                          (New York: Viking, 2011).
                    Progress
                    SUE ZEMKA
                    A         belief in progress was so deeply embedded in nineteenth-century
                             Britain that it was one of those beliefs for which there was no
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000918

                                                                                                            P RO G R E SS           813
              outside. Scientific knowledge was advancing; so, too, was technology, cap-
              italism, and culture. Their development was part of the progress of his-
              tory itself. Where Giambattista Vico’s influential model of history
              traced the rise and fall of civilizations, Immanuel Kant’s 1784 Idea for a
              Universal History from a Cosmopolitan View replaced the cycles of “man”
              with his telos—a one-way street. The subsequent metanarratives of the
              nineteenth century followed a similarly linear movement of accretion,
              complexification, and sophistication. Auguste Comte imagined social
              history moving towards perfection through the human application of sci-
              ence; he called this Positivism. Charles Darwin theorized evolutionary
              mechanisms that governed biological life independently of human con-
              trol. Darwin tried to purge evolutionary theory of the theological and sec-
              ular baggage of design and its goals, its language of improvement or
              destiny, but social Darwinism put them right back in. The nineteenth-
              century idea of history was unthinkable apart from the form of progress.
                      Theodor Adorno identifies the “concept of total progress” with
              bourgeois society.1 But its totality is misleading. Victorian progress was
              never “total” in the sense of uncontested. Fears of regression or collapse
              existed throughout the nineteenth century. John Ruskin was never one
              to trust categorically in progress, which he equated with hubris, an invi-
              tation to divine correction. Still, while the Jeremiahs of the nineteenth
              century chastened their contemporaries’ overconfidence in the progres-
              sive virtues of British industry, they did not ascribe to a belief that decays
              or reversals in civilization were natural and inevitable. Instead, they
              treated them as dangers that could be prevented by checks to selfish
              social habits. Decay and reversal were thus folded into the Victorian ide-
              ology of progress as critique. The gospel of progress drew strength from
              its critics: the Jeremiad styles of Ruskin, Thomas Carlyle, and occasionally
              Matthew Arnold were revered throughout the century. Thus, the religion
              of progress was always beset by certain salubrious crises of faith, all
              through the Palmerston years and the Great Exhibition, more audibly
              so in the de-evolutionary fears and nihilist outcroppings of the fin de
              siècle, and deafeningly so after the world wars of the twentieth century.
              But modernity’s definition of itself as progressive was never completely
              eradicated. Even after the holocaust, Adorno perceived that there was
              enough life left in the old belief for him to feel the need to recuperate
              it from its cloying and dangerous excesses, which he does by reconceiving
              progress as a dialectics of resistance.2
                      Historical and individual progress came together in the nineteenth
              century to solidify the notion of a species destiny—Hegelian, Marxist,
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000918

                    814          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Utilitarian/Liberal, or eventually eugenicist. “Humanity,” in these philos-
                    ophies, is a vehicle driven by one or another engine (biology, reason,
                    love, spirit, God) towards one or another version of perfection (enlight-
                    enment, freedom, justice, adaptability, or happiness). The sticking point
                    in these philosophies—the place where thought did not map easily onto
                    reality—was in the relationship of the parts to the whole of “humanity.”
                    For John Stuart Mill, the role of the part was crucial. The impressive pace
                    of improvement in Britain and Europe depended upon it, he believed,
                    insofar as liberal society was healthy and robust in proportion to the free-
                    dom it allotted to the individual. Hannah Arendt, writing from the per-
                    spective of the post-war mid-twentieth century, believed that such
                    Victorian salutations to individual liberty were little more that naïve ves-
                    tiges of the intoxicating optimism of pre-revolutionary France. There was
                    really a jaundiced secret at the heart of the Victorian belief in progress,
                    Arendt suggested, and it was the recognition that “the endless progress
                    of bourgeois society” required the accumulation of power by nations
                    equipped to enforce economic laws on a global scale.3 And this accumu-
                    lation of power—“imperialism” by name—depended on racism as its
                    enabling ideology.4 In all its iterations, the metanarrative of human per-
                    fectibility through progress was always uncertain as to what humanity was
                    —where to draw boundaries around and within it, and what this meant
                    for the ontological status of those cast by thought to the outside.
                            There is no accident in the fact that the age dominated by concerns
                    with the progress of humanity is also the age that we now identify with the
                    ineluctable emergence of anthropogenic climate change. In retrospect,
                    the blind spot in the nineteenth-century’s idealistic humanism is also
                    its (and our) tragic undoing. For possibly the only thing that Victorian
                    Britain believed to be unchanging was its climate. Amitav Ghosh calls it
                    “the great derangement”—the assumption that “Nature is moderate
                    and orderly,” and that the scaffolding of “the real” no less than literary
                    realism was the reliable backdrop of a maritime climate, with the seasonal
                    patterns, the plants and weather, which that climate produced.5 And so
                    on for the different climates of the globe, each of them providing unique
                    but consistent stages on which human beings acted out their dramas,
                    confident that no matter the gravity of suffering they endured, the planet
                    would, more or less, go on the same. If there was an outside to the
                    Victorian belief in progress, a space free of the presumed laws of unidi-
                    rectional change and development, it was (ironically and erroneously)
                    the space of nonhuman natural environments, which were static in
                    their seasonal predictability, practically (so it seemed) without end.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000918

                                                                                                            P RO G R E SS           815
                      Now that global environments are unmistakably changing, we are in
              a position—albeit a shaky one—from which to view the concept of
              human progress itself from the outside. More than the debacles of the
              twentieth-century world wars, climate change frees us from the deeply
              embedded premise that, whatever its ups and downs, and despite the set-
              backs caused by our viciousness, human history nevertheless progresses.
              Human survival, it is apparent, along with the progressive projects of
              social justice and human self-understanding, are dependent on, entan-
              gled with, the future of climates. To speak of the “ends of man” in the
              twentieth-first century is to invoke a grimmer literalism than the enlight-
              enment ever intended.
                      The ideas of “progress” and “humanity” are tied together with the
              rise of climate change in a knot of causal relations and influences that
              we have only recently begun to unravel. Paul Crutzen and Eugene
              Stoermer’s introduction of “the anthropocene” into geological modeling
              inspired an increasing wave of work on environmental history and theory
              in the humanistic disciplines, and more works are published (seemingly
              exponentially) each year. In the moment of this rich critical activity, a few
              needs and possibilities appear. Some needs: to continue rethinking
              “humanity” and “subjectivity” in terms of intersectionality, an alternative
              to the past pitfalls of bounded and stable models of selves and groups;
              and the need to interject eco-justice into these conversations as a com-
              mon denominator of concern, albeit with differing levels of responsibil-
              ity. Some possibilities: to rethink progress, a temporal form, as space, the
              simultaneous coexistence of arenas of injustice and hatred with local
              practices of justice and care; relatedly, to recuperate mourning as
              empowerment, “shared vulnerability” as strength, as in Judith Butler’s
              thinking, but now in environmental no less than global politics.6
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Theodor Adorno, “Progress,” in Can One Live After Auschwitz?, ed. Roll
                   Tiedemann, trans. Henry Pickford (Stanford: Stanford University
                   Press, 2003), 143.
              2. Adorno, “Progress,” 144–45.
              3. Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951; New York:
                   Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1968), 143–44.
              4. Arendt, The Origins, 158.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000918

                    816          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    5. Amitav Ghosh, The Great Derangement: Climate Change and the
                          Unthinkable (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016), 22.
                    6. Judith Butler, Precarious Life: The Powers of Mourning and Politics
                          (New York: Verso, 2004), 49.
                    Queer
                    ELLEN CROWELL
                         N 1891, Punch inaugurated “Queer Queries,” a faux-advice column
                    I     where imaginary readers aired grievances and sought solutions. In
                    April 1891, “Urgent”—a starving vicar in a stingy parish—seeks counsel
                    on whether to pawn his “lectern and ancient carved pulpit” for food,
                    while “Perplexed”—whose property boundary has been breached by an
                    invasive “aroma of questionable herrings and very pronounced had-
                    docks” from the fish shop next door—asks whether to demand full
                    meals as compensation.1 Alongside these “Queer Queries” sits a poem
                    entitled “Coming Dress,” which dismisses as mere “queer robes” the sar-
                    torial future advocated by feminist reformers: “[S]hall we welcome with
                    delight / queer robes that make a girl a fright? / Pooh-pooh! We’re sim-
                    ply imperturbable. / The Reign of Fashion’s undisturbable.”2 Vicars, aro-
                    mas, and clothing here share queer pride of place; queer is that which
                    disturbs or perturbs; even (or especially) if their rumblings can be easily
                    contained by the boundaries of conventional humor and fashion. In
                    other words, in 1891 “queer” was punchy.
                            It is, of course, punchy again—perhaps even punch drunk. A Gale
                    Primary Sources term search suggests that “queer” hit a popular high-
                    water mark in the mid-1890s—a height it did not reach again until the
                    early 1990s. The pivot year was 1898, after which “queer” fell off precip-
                    itously and—after a small resurgence in the 1920s—kept falling. The fate
                    of “Queer Queries” speaks to this pinch point: inaugurated in 1891, by
                    1898 Punch had discontinued the feature entirely. When “queer” did
                    return to fin-de-siècle popularity levels in 1991, it did so only to blow
                    right through and keep rising, up through our present moment.
                    Registering both the pain and shame of a homophobic past and the
                    world-making energies of political, critical and aesthetic activism, the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000918

