                                                                                           R E A D I NG , R E A L I S M             831
              21. Qtd. in Robert Snape, “National Home Reading Union,” Journal of
                     Victorian Culture 7, no. 1 (2002): 86–110, 93.
              22. Leah Price, “Victorian Reading,” in The Cambridge History of Victorian
                     Literature, ed. Kate Flint (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
                     2012), 34.
              23. See, for instance, Jerome McGann, “Recitation Considered as a Fine
                     Art,” Experimental Literary Education, English Language Notes 47, no. 1
                     (2009): 181–83; Jonathan Culler, “The Closeness of Close
                     Reading,” ADE Bulletin 149 (2010): 20–25; Catherine Robson, Heart
                     Beats: Everyday Life and the Memorized Poem (Princeton: Princeton
                     University Press, 2012).
              24. For a concise illustration of how major Victorian reading theories
                     press upon this distinction in relevant and productive ways, see
                     Stephen Arata, “Literature and Information,” PMLA 130, no. 3
                     (2015): 673–78, especially 677.
              Realism
              AYELET BEN-YISHAI
              I   N considering Aru, the young, idealistic protagonist of her 1996 novel
                   A Matter of Time, Indian novelist Shashi Deshpande has her narrator
              muse on her own narratorial/authorial enterprise and technique:
                      But to [admit knowledge of the future into her narrative] is to admit that
                      Aru is the heroine of this story; only for the heroine can Time be bent back-
                      wards.
                             Is Aru the heroine? Why not? She has youth, one of the necessary
                      requirements of a heroine. And the other—beauty? Well, possibly. The
                      potential is there anyway. (The Natyashastra lays down that the heroine
                      should have nobility and steadfastness as well. But we can ignore this. We
                      no longer make such demands on our heroines.) Perhaps there’s this too,
                      this above all, that Aru is trying to make sense of what is happening.1
                      Victorianists might easily recognize the allusion to George Eliot’s
              famous “why always Dorothea?” passage from Middlemarch, making
              explicit not only the connection between the two protagonists but also
              the genres in which they appear. We might then ask: if the allusion to
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000967

                    832          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Dorothea amplifies Aru’s youth, misguided idealism, and understated
                    beauty, how does Middlemarch function in A Matter of Time, or, for that
                    matter, how does Victorian realism function in the twentieth-century
                    Indian novel in English? In other words, Aru is not alone in her need
                    to make sense; she shares that with the novel, with the reader implied
                    by the text, and with the epistemological project of novelistic realism.
                    In short, in order to make sense, the narrator tells us, A Matter of Time
                    needs Victorian realism, here neatly coded and synecdochically packaged
                    as Dorothea.
                            I suggest that Dorothea, the Natyashastra (a 2000-year-old Sanskrit
                    treatise on literary theory), Middlemarch and Victorian realism, all func-
                    tion here as reifications—as already-packaged and already-known objects,
                    ready to serve as connotative or allusive commodities. The idea of realism
                    as reified might come as no surprise to readers of Fredric Jameson, who
                    argues that realism—born to challenge and “dissolve” narrative arche-
                    types, conventions, and other reifications by force of “the singular or
                    the contingent”—dies under the weight of its own anti-reification
                    impulse. The result is realism’s ossification and degradation: the “three
                    basic realist narrative paradigms [who evolved to “dissolve” earlier reifica-
                    tions]2 will themselves be reified and become more distinct sub-genres,
                    with a tendency to find themselves degraded into mass-cultural forms
                    and versions.”3 Fortunately, according to Jameson, realism’s demise by
                    reification is salvaged by modernism, which subsumes its sub-genres to
                    transcend them. In this view, realism is always already laying the ground
                    for modernism and only comes into its own through its demise.
                            While Victorianists (myself included) might take issue with this
                    predilection for modernism, I do think that Jameson generates an impor-
                    tant, dynamic reading of realism as always process and never object,
                    where the pull to the historical singular is always a corrective—or a dia-
                    lectical countermove—to the “archetype” or the reification of realist
                    form as genre (145). However, I would argue pace Jameson, that this pro-
                    cess has not ceded its power to modernism, but continues its dialectical
                    process to this day, not because it has not been reified, but as reification.4
                    In other words, I suggest, if “the work of realism lies in dissolving [the]
                    archetype” (by virtue of the singular), we might also want to think of
                    the ongoing work done by realism in its reified form, long after the period
                    known as realist.
                            As Victorianists committed to realist form (and I realize that this
                    does not include all of us, and definitely not all of us in the same way)
                    we have long been used to fighting the losing battle of rescuing realism
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000967

                                                                                                               REALISM              833
              from its reification (even fetishization) by modernists on the one hand or
              by “middle-brow,” “derivative” writers and readers on the other. These
              reifications assign to Victorian realism a static set of characteristics or
              meanings, reducing it to a stable, simplified object, rather than process.
              They include versions of realism as naïve, as bourgeois, as complicit with
              power, as a genre of the social, as feminine, as long, as unreflective, etc.
              Certainly, Deshpande’s critics tend to regard her writing (largely because
              of its unmarked or unremarkable realism) as middlebrow, bourgeois, and
              that most damning of all criticisms—that of a women’s writer.5
              Deshpande’s realist novels seem to be perfect examples of one of
              Jameson’s degraded, mass-cultural forms.
                      But like the Victorian realist novels themselves—which are more dif-
              ferent from each other than similar—the reifications of realism vary
              widely and historically, but are also fascinating and instructive. What
              would happen then, if we turn to these reifications not to get past
              them but rather to get at them? What would it mean to think of realism
              qua reification?
                      If we are also committed to historical specificity we might then want
              to examine the various specific historically inflected ways in which
              Victorian realism functions as a reified form in the twentieth and
              twenty-first century, as well as during the Victorian period itself. Rather
              than unpacking the reification to discover what realism really was (or in
              addition to unpacking the reification, or in dialectical tension with
              unpacking the reification) we might try to think of the specifics that
              went into the various reifications of realism as they were baked into a
              genre, as they hardened into the formal shorthand as which they have
              served in the last two-hundred-odd years.6 After all, one of the interesting
              things about reifications is that while they seem hardened, they in fact
              contain the vestiges of the historical specificity and dialectical processes
              that made them, as Jameson shows like no one else can.
                      At this point we might need a second, dialectical move: after unpack-
              ing reification to understand the process of its hardening into an object,
              we must then trace the different ways in which these realism-objects have
              functioned as reifications since the Victorian period—and to what ends.
              What work does realism do in its new context? What happens in the inter-
              face between realism-as-reification and the texts that employ it? This
              question becomes even more salient—as in the example with which I
              opened—in novels that employ these generic reifications not to negate
              them but to emulate them, and especially when they also import, via allu-
              sion or citation, a Victorian text itself. Aru meets Dorothea; Deshpande’s
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000967

                    834          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    narration meets Eliot’s; realism as reified narrative convention (in the
                    narrative style of the novel) meets realism as reified object. The friction
                    created between these textual reifications has realism doubling back on
                    itself, exposing the various dialectics at work.7 Most importantly, both
                    texts (both sides of the dialectic) are realist novels; the process of defam-
                    iliarization and de-reification works itself out without needing to have
                    recourse to modernism.
                            In other words, I am suggesting an afterlife of Victorian realism not
                    as subsumed by modernism, but constantly challenged by an ongoing
                    realism.8 In this deviation from Jameson’s argument, realism—not mod-
                    ernism—dissolves its own reifications by “appropriating their archetypical
                    plots for new acts of freedom,” doubling up on itself in a process one
                    might be tempted to call (that might look uncannily similar to) a nega-
                    tive dialectic. Such a process—of realism as signifier in the world, rather
                    than of the world—can give us a better account of realisms in the twen-
                    tieth and twenty-first century, as well as of their Victorian predecessors.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Shashi Deshpande, A Matter of Time (New York: The Feminist Press at
                          CUNY, 2001), 185.
                    2. The bildungsroman, the historical novel, and the novel of adultery.
                          The fourth new or subgenre is naturalism, which he discusses as a
                          slightly different special case.
                    3. Fredric Jameson, The Antinomies of Realism (New York: Verso, 2013),
                          143, 150.
                    4. To clarify, by “reification” I here mean a historical process that has been
                          hardened into a self-explanatory ahistorical object.
                    5. For a longer discussion of Deshpande criticism and my reading of A
                          Matter of Time see Ayelet Ben-Yishai, “‘By its very presence’:
                          Conventionality and Commonality in Shashi Deshpande’s Realism,”
                          The Journal of Commonwealth Literature 52, no. 2 (2015): 300–15.
                    6. See also Carolyn Lesjak, “Reading Dialectically,” Criticism 55, no. 2
                          (2013): 233–77.
                    7. Freedgood and Schmitt similarly argue for a reading of textual cita-
                          tion that defamiliarizes its referents. Elaine Freedgood and Cannon
                          Schmitt, “Denotatively, Technically, Literally,” Representations 125, no.
                          1 (2014): 1–14, 9.
                    8. See also Joe Cleary, Jed Esty, and Colleen Lye, “Peripheral Realisms,”
                          Modern Language Quarterly 73, no. 3 (2012): 255–68.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000967

                                                                                                               REALISM              835
              Many thanks to Yoon Sun Lee and Sarah Ann Wells for their insightful
              comments on an earlier draft; to Lauren Goodlad for ongoing
              Jameson conversation; and to Jenny Wale for her research assistance.
              Realism
              IAN DUNCAN
                                                                 1 - IMMANENCE
              R      EALISM achieves critical mass in 1856, the year George Eliot turns to
                       writing fiction. She and George Henry Lewes read volume three of
              Ruskin’s Modern Painters, in which the Oxford English Dictionary records
              the first use of the word to denote a representational code in art or liter-
              ature. Writing in the Westminster Review in April, Eliot comments: “The
              truth of infinite value that [Ruskin] teaches is realism—the doctrine
              that all truth and beauty are to be attained by a humble and faithful
              study of nature, and not by substituting vague forms, bred by imagination
              on the mists of feeling, in place of definite, substantial reality.”1 Eliot’s
              essay “The Natural History of German Life” (hereafter NHGL), pub-
              lished in the same journal three months later (two months before
              Eliot begins “The Sad Fortunes of Amos Barton”), opens with a medita-
              tion on realism, although Eliot doesn’t use the term.
                      Lewes does, in an 1858 essay, “Realism in Art: Modern German
              Fiction,” which elaborates the aesthetic principles outlined in NHGL
              and developed by George Eliot in the famous seventeenth chapter of
              Adam Bede. For Lewes, realism is not antithetical to idealism (a fallacy
              that disables most German efforts in the novel) but is the authentic
              mode of expressing it; it is “that legitimate form of idealization which
              consists in presenting the highest form of reality.”2 The head of Christ
              by Titian has “its profound significance and idealism in the wonderful
              reality of the presentation; the head is more intensely human than any
              other representation of Christ, but the humanity is such as accords
              with our highest conceptions.” For this, a photographic fidelity to exter-
              nal appearances is not enough. Realism also requires the artist’s invest-
              ment of sentiment, “sympathy with the internal life.”3 Ethical as well as
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000967

