                                                                                                               REALISM              835
              Many thanks to Yoon Sun Lee and Sarah Ann Wells for their insightful
              comments on an earlier draft; to Lauren Goodlad for ongoing
              Jameson conversation; and to Jenny Wale for her research assistance.
              Realism
              IAN DUNCAN
                                                                 1 - IMMANENCE
              R      EALISM achieves critical mass in 1856, the year George Eliot turns to
                       writing fiction. She and George Henry Lewes read volume three of
              Ruskin’s Modern Painters, in which the Oxford English Dictionary records
              the first use of the word to denote a representational code in art or liter-
              ature. Writing in the Westminster Review in April, Eliot comments: “The
              truth of infinite value that [Ruskin] teaches is realism—the doctrine
              that all truth and beauty are to be attained by a humble and faithful
              study of nature, and not by substituting vague forms, bred by imagination
              on the mists of feeling, in place of definite, substantial reality.”1 Eliot’s
              essay “The Natural History of German Life” (hereafter NHGL), pub-
              lished in the same journal three months later (two months before
              Eliot begins “The Sad Fortunes of Amos Barton”), opens with a medita-
              tion on realism, although Eliot doesn’t use the term.
                      Lewes does, in an 1858 essay, “Realism in Art: Modern German
              Fiction,” which elaborates the aesthetic principles outlined in NHGL
              and developed by George Eliot in the famous seventeenth chapter of
              Adam Bede. For Lewes, realism is not antithetical to idealism (a fallacy
              that disables most German efforts in the novel) but is the authentic
              mode of expressing it; it is “that legitimate form of idealization which
              consists in presenting the highest form of reality.”2 The head of Christ
              by Titian has “its profound significance and idealism in the wonderful
              reality of the presentation; the head is more intensely human than any
              other representation of Christ, but the humanity is such as accords
              with our highest conceptions.” For this, a photographic fidelity to exter-
              nal appearances is not enough. Realism also requires the artist’s invest-
              ment of sentiment, “sympathy with the internal life.”3 Ethical as well as
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000979

                    836          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    aesthetic, realism’s sympathetic transaction recognizes a universal
                    humanity latent within our individual, everyday selves.
                                                                       2 - MEDIATION
                    Realism’s goal is recognition: not just of a world composed of contingent,
                    particular phenomena but of the immanence of the ideal in the
                    real—“truth and beauty” in “definite, substantial reality,” “beauty in . . .
                    commonplace things.”4 Victorian realism is a representational technol-
                    ogy of mediation: between the actual and ideal, particular and general,
                    individual and species. This distinguishes it from the “formal realism,”
                    posited on a primacy of individual experience, which drives the
                    eighteenth-century “rise of the novel” according to Ian Watt, whose influ-
                    ential thesis may have weighed too heavily in accounts of nineteenth-
                    century practice.5 Victorian realism models the scientific technique of
                    induction, eliciting general laws from the interaction of “thoughts and
                    things,” described by William Whewell in his disciplinary synthesis The
                    Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.6 George Levine has pinned George
                    Eliot’s realism to her “Positivist idealism” and the scientific method of
                    Lewes and John Tyndall.7 More recently, Catherine Gallagher has argued
                    that the conception of novelistic character as a mediating figure between
                    particular individual and general type is crucial to the rhetoric of fiction-
                    ality in the regime of realism; and that George Eliot’s novels press this
                    rhetoric to an affective limit—articulating a yearning for particularity
                    as embodiment, shared between character and reader, in countercurrent
                    to the reach for the ideal (truth and beauty) through the local empirical
                    case.8
                            Some of the more compelling accounts of realism have described its
                    mediation as operating between the individual and what Lewes and Eliot
                    (after Auguste Comte and Herbert Spencer) called the “social organism”
                    or “social medium.” Where Daniel Defoe’s novels predicate their realism
                    upon a protagonist’s alienation or isolation, in Watt’s account,9
                    nineteenth-century fiction socializes reality—as Franco Moretti has
                    argued with reference to key realist forms, the Bildungsroman and free
                    indirect discourse.10 For Georg Lukács, the great works of European real-
                    ism articulate a dialectical relation between the individual life and its
                    social totality via the invention of a new characterological figure, the his-
                    torical type.11 Elizabeth Deeds Ermarth makes the case for realism as a
                    technology of “consensus,” analogous with Renaissance pictorial
                    vanishing-point perspective, which aligns individual subjectivities within
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000979

                                                                                                               REALISM              837
              a unified virtual space.12 And Rae Greiner’s account of “sympathetic real-
              ism” defines sympathy as a formal operation, rather than affective con-
              tent, through which the imagination composes a shared continuum of
              feeling and cognition amid the unknowable minds of others, in a mod-
              ern “society of strangers.”13
                                                                 3 - HUMANITY
              What if we consider the human rather than the social as the totality
              invoked by Victorian realism? Admiring Titian’s Christ for its realization
              of an exalted idea of humanity, Lewes reiterates the displacement of the reli-
              gious sense from the divine to the human argued in the landmark works
              translated by George Eliot at the outset of her career: David Strauss’s Life
              of Jesus, Ludwig Feuerbach’s Essence of Christianity. The human and the social
              often stand synecdochally for one another, in an equation established in
              Scottish Enlightenment philosophical anthropology—a critical juncture in
              the genealogy of British realism, as Greiner shows in her discussion of
              Adam Smith’s Theory of Moral Sentiments.14 Sociability became a bulwark of
              human exceptionalism once “man” was fully embedded in natural history,
              since sociability was the engine of progress in that uniquely human adven-
              ture, the perfectibility of the species. It provides a humanist frame for
              Lukács’ Marxism, in which “the unbroken upward evolution of mankind”
              proceeds upon “the organic, indissoluble connection between man as a
              private individual and man as a social being.”15 But this premise of the
              new anthropology was contested at its foundation, with Jean-Jacques
              Rousseau’s denial that sociability was a fundamental constituent of human
              nature in his Discourse on the Origins of Inequality. A little over a century later
              Charles Darwin would mount an assault from the other side, arguing in
              The Descent of Man that the “social instinct” was not only intrinsic to human
              nature but also prior to it, shared by other animals, so that its byproducts,
              morality and conscience, could no longer count as uniquely human facul-
              ties. Flourishing between Rousseau and Darwin, realist fiction claimed as
              its scientific analogue “the history of man,” as George Eliot writes at the open-
              ing of Middlemarch, “and how the mysterious mixture behaves under the vary-
              ing experiments of Time.”16 Realism’s mediation between individual life and
              species being charges both with ontological solidity. Victorian realism is thus
              indeed, as Ermarth argues, the literary equivalent of vanishing-point per-
              spective, a repertoire of techniques to secure the human at the center of real-
              ity in place of God: at the same time that the Victorian natural sciences are
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000979

                    838          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    rewriting reality as radically inhuman, in spatial and temporal scale, in histor-
                    ical direction.
                                                               4 - HUMANISM:          LIBERALISM
                    The “problem of justifying distinction in a world that presumes common
                    humanity beneath surface differences is central to the moral economy of
                    mid-nineteenth-century realism,” writes John Plotz, provocatively character-
                    izing the realist novel as the genre of “liberal guilt.”17 In Bleak Liberalism
                    Amanda Anderson mounts a strong defense of the liberal politics of
                    Victorian realism’s work of mediation—reconciling a tragic or satiric
                    (“bleak”) knowledge of injustice and suffering with an efficacious sympathy.
                    Assimilating to this argument works that are formally quite different, Bleak
                    House as well as Middlemarch and The Way We Live Now, Anderson pitches
                    hercase fora unified liberal aesthetic of Victorian “high realism” against ideo-
                    logical formations that are historically outside it (closing upon us now).18
                            It remains crucial, nevertheless, to acknowledge tendencies within
                    Victorian realism that push against this broadly liberal aesthetic.
                    Darwin’s work constitutes a horizon of Victorian realism in the sense
                    not only of a fulfillment of its logic but of a limit at which the formation
                    begins to disintegrate, insofar as Darwinian natural history dethrones
                    man from nature’s center and history’s end. As other categories—notably
                    “life”—take humanity’s privileged place, the field of representation admits
                    potentials of the inhuman and posthuman, as Elizabeth Grosz argues in
                    her philosophical reflections on Darwin and Henri Bergson.19 Near the
                    end of Middlemarch, Dorothea’s epiphany of “involuntary, palpitating
                    life”20 opens onto a new totality that enfolds the human but also exceeds
                    it and ultimately, in the stream of evolutionary time, dissolves it. “Judging
                    from the past,” writes Darwin, “we may safely infer that not one living spe-
                    cies will transmit its unaltered likeness to a distant futurity.”21 We see why
                    provincial life has become the topos of Victorian realism: it offers a protec-
                    tive enclosure for the history of man, a sanctuary of slow time, within which
                    the mysterious mixture may remain, or seem to remain, stable.
                            As for Bleak House, populated by grotesque life-forms in the process
                    of speciation (although not on Darwinian principles), its division of the
                    narrative splitting the grammatical components (first versus third person,
                    past historic versus present tense) of realism’s core technique, free indi-
                    rect discourse: Dickens’s novel effects a denial at the level of form of that
                    world held in common—a shared social universe, a singular humanity—
                    that is realism’s premise. “The word humanity strikes us as strangely
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000979

                                                                                                               REALISM              839
              discordant, in the midst of these pages; for, let us boldly declare it, there
              is no humanity here,” Henry James complains of a later Dickens novel
              (Our Mutual Friend): “[Humanity] is in what men have in common
              with each other, and not in what they have in distinction. [Dickens’s char-
              acters] have nothing in common with each other, except the fact that
              they have nothing in common with mankind at large.”22 Dickens’s insight
              gains force on the far side of Victorian realism’s project of anthropomor-
              phic salvage.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. [George Eliot], “Art and Belles Lettres,” Westminster Review 65 (April
                     1856): 626.
                2. [G. H. Lewes], “Realism in Art: Recent German Fiction,” Westminster
                     Review 70 (October 1858): 274.
                3. Lewes, “Realism in Art,” 274.
                4. Eliot, “Art and Belles Lettres,” 626; Adam Bede, ed. Carol A. Martin
                     (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 162.
                5. Ian Watt, The Rise of the Novel: Studies in Defoe, Richardson and Fielding
                     (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1957).
                6. William Whewell, The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences: Founded upon
                     their History, 2 vols. (London: J. W. Parker, 1847), 2: 17, 24.
                7. George Levine, “George Eliot’s Hypothesis of Reality,”
                     Nineteenth-Century Fiction 35, no. 1 (1980): 1–28, 2–4.
                8. Catherine Gallagher, “The Rise of Fictionality,” in The Novel, Vol. 1:
                     History, Geography, and Culture, ed. Franco Moretti (Princeton:
                     Princeton University Press, 2006), 336–63; “George Eliot:
                     Immanent Victorian,” Representations 90, no. 1 (2005): 61–74.
                9. See Marina MacKay, “The Wartime Rise of The Rise of the Novel,”
                     Representations 119, no. 1 (2012): 119–43.
              10. Franco Moretti, The Way of the World: The Bildungsroman in European
                     Culture (London: Verso, 1987); “Serious Century,” in The Novel,
                     Vol. 1, ed. Moretti, 364–400.
              11. Georg Lukács, Studies in European Realism: A Sociological Survey of the
                     Writings of Balzac, Stendhal, Zola, Tolstoy, Gorki and Others, trans.
                     Edith Bone (New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1964).
              12. Elizabeth Deeds Ermarth, Realism and Consensus in the English Novel:
                     Time, Space and Narrative (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
                     1983).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000979

                    840          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    13. Rae Greiner, Sympathetic Realism in Nineteenth-Century British Fiction
                            (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012); James Vernon,
                            Distant Strangers: How Britain Became Modern (Berkeley: University of
                            California Press, 2014), 18–19.
                    14. Greiner, Sympathetic Realism, 17–23.
                    15. Lukács, Studies in European Realism, 3, 8.
                    16. George Eliot, Middlemarch, ed. Rosemary Ashton (Harmondsworth:
                            Penguin, 1994), 3.
                    17. John Plotz, “Is Realism Failing? The Rise of Secondary Worlds,” Novel
                            50, no. 3 (2017): 426–35, 427.
                    18. Amanda Anderson, Bleak Liberalism (Chicago: University of Chicago
                            Press, 2016), 46–77.
                    19. Elizabeth Grosz, Becoming Undone: Darwinian Reflections on Life, Politics,
                            and Art (Durham: Duke University Press, 2011), 11–25, 26–35.
                    20. Eliot, Middlemarch, 788.
                    21. Charles Darwin, On the Origin of Species, ed. William Bynum (London:
                            Penguin, 2009), 436.
                    22. Henry James, review in The Nation, December 21, 1865, in Charles
                            Dickens: The Critical Heritage, ed. Philip Collins (London: Routledge
                            & Kegan Paul, 1971), 471.
                    Religion
                    ILANA M. BLUMBERG
                    “W             HAT ‘religion’ turns out to be in a given time, place, writer, or
                                   text when not constituted in advance” by any critical theory is
                    often “revelatory,” says the postsecular critic Lori Branch.1 Nowhere is
                    this truer than in the mid-century prose of such writers as George
                    Eliot, Matthew Arnold, and John Stuart Mill, whose varied uses of the
                    term “religion” reveal a word itself in transformation, at times referring
                    backward to an established social and spiritual order of Christian practice
                    and belief while, more often, projecting toward a future order of moral
                    and psychological orientation still in the making. In 1888, Mary
                    Augusta Ward sought to catch the extraordinary activity compressed in
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000979

