                    840          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    13. Rae Greiner, Sympathetic Realism in Nineteenth-Century British Fiction
                            (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012); James Vernon,
                            Distant Strangers: How Britain Became Modern (Berkeley: University of
                            California Press, 2014), 18–19.
                    14. Greiner, Sympathetic Realism, 17–23.
                    15. Lukács, Studies in European Realism, 3, 8.
                    16. George Eliot, Middlemarch, ed. Rosemary Ashton (Harmondsworth:
                            Penguin, 1994), 3.
                    17. John Plotz, “Is Realism Failing? The Rise of Secondary Worlds,” Novel
                            50, no. 3 (2017): 426–35, 427.
                    18. Amanda Anderson, Bleak Liberalism (Chicago: University of Chicago
                            Press, 2016), 46–77.
                    19. Elizabeth Grosz, Becoming Undone: Darwinian Reflections on Life, Politics,
                            and Art (Durham: Duke University Press, 2011), 11–25, 26–35.
                    20. Eliot, Middlemarch, 788.
                    21. Charles Darwin, On the Origin of Species, ed. William Bynum (London:
                            Penguin, 2009), 436.
                    22. Henry James, review in The Nation, December 21, 1865, in Charles
                            Dickens: The Critical Heritage, ed. Philip Collins (London: Routledge
                            & Kegan Paul, 1971), 471.
                    Religion
                    ILANA M. BLUMBERG
                    “W             HAT ‘religion’ turns out to be in a given time, place, writer, or
                                   text when not constituted in advance” by any critical theory is
                    often “revelatory,” says the postsecular critic Lori Branch.1 Nowhere is
                    this truer than in the mid-century prose of such writers as George
                    Eliot, Matthew Arnold, and John Stuart Mill, whose varied uses of the
                    term “religion” reveal a word itself in transformation, at times referring
                    backward to an established social and spiritual order of Christian practice
                    and belief while, more often, projecting toward a future order of moral
                    and psychological orientation still in the making. In 1888, Mary
                    Augusta Ward sought to catch the extraordinary activity compressed in
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000980

                                                                                                            RELIG ION               841
              the abstract noun when she allowed one of her characters to turn it into a
              verb: “We are in the full stream of religion-making.”2
                      In his essay, “Utility of Religion” (written between 1850 and 1858,
              published in 1874), J. S. Mill rejects the presumption that religion
              must mean supernaturalism, a faith in those rewarding and punishing
              “unseen Powers” that Eliot, too, describes in her depiction of
              Protestant, Catholic, and pagan faiths in such novels as Silas Marner
              and Romola. But, like Eliot and Arnold, Mill refuses to limit “religion”
              to a cosmological reality and redefines it as a moral and imaginative func-
              tion. Now, religion—like poetry—becomes the answer to a universal
              human need, paradoxically, for that thing which takes us out of our-
              selves, beyond the self. Religion and poetry, says Mill, “supply the same
              want, that of ideal conceptions grander and more beautiful than we
              see realized in the prose of human life.”3 We do not need to travel to
              another world to “exalt the feelings” and “ennoble the conduct”; instead,
              the “idealization of our earthly life, the cultivation of a high conception
              of what it may be made” may be able to supply “a poetry, and, in the best
              sense of the word, a religion.”4
                      The essence of religion, for Mill, is to turn emotions and desires
              toward “an ideal object,” one that is “rightfully paramount over all selfish
              objects of desire.”5 What motivates such selflessness? Not the promise of a
              world to come but the capacity to imagine the approbation of all those
              whom we respect, dead or alive, Eliot’s “choir invisible.”6 The conscious-
              ness of being not only an individual life but a member of the human spe-
              cies as it moves toward the greater good of the greatest number is
              religion, says Mill: selfless, evolving, effective, and ennobling.
                      In the mid-1860s, Arnold, too, defines “religion” as an “effort” of the
              human race, as a “voice” of human experience like art, science, poetry,
              philosophy, and history, working with one shared end: the definition
              of human perfection and the progress toward it. Arnold, like Mill, retires
              the “religion” that refers to doctrine, ritual, traditions, worship, a relation
              between the supernatural and the natural, the divine and the human,
              that orders personal and collective history. Religion now comes to
              stand alongside culture, alongside poetry, as pursuit: “Not a having and
              a resting, but a growing and a becoming, is the character of perfection
              as culture conceives it; and here, too, it coincides with religion.”7
                      For Arnold, as for Mill, the relation between the personal and the
              collective replaces the central relation of “religion,” which had been
              between the human and the divine: “And because men are all members
              of one great whole, and the sympathy which is in human nature will not
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000980

                    842          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    allow one member to be indifferent to the rest, or to have a perfect wel-
                    fare independent of the rest, the expansion of our humanity, to suit the
                    idea of perfection which culture forms, must be a general expansion.”8
                            Whereas Arnold and Mill wrote of an elevated “religion” in which
                    right action is motivated by the abstract idea of species-consciousness,
                    George Eliot dramatized the extraordinary difficulty of such religion-
                    making that would result in a religion that works against selfishness
                    and even against any sense of particularism (family, neighbors, nation)
                    in favor of universal moral progress. “Religion,” Eliot writes, is “some-
                    thing, clearly, that lies outside personal desires, that includes resignation
                    for ourselves and active love for what is not ourselves.”9 Yet the path to
                    such selflessness is often for Eliot old religion. In her early novella,
                    “Janet’s Repentance,” Eliot describes the progress initiated by evangeli-
                    calism, with all its many flaws: “nevertheless, Evangelicalism had brought
                    into palpable existence and operation in Milby society that idea of duty,
                    that recognition of something to be lived for beyond the mere satisfac-
                    tion of self.”10 In Mill on the Floss, it is the words of Thomas à Kempis
                    that open Maggie to new moral understandings. And in Romola, it is
                    Savonarola, the Dominican preacher and reformer, who confronts the
                    heroine with the absence of any commitment beyond the animal affec-
                    tion for her most immediate family: she is “‘without a law, without a reli-
                    gion. . . . You are no better than a beast of the field when she is robbed of
                    her young. If the yearning of a fleshly love is gone, you are without love,
                    without obligation.’”11 In spite of Savonarola’s own shortcomings, it is he
                    who occasions Romola’s elevation to a life of wider duty.
                            In the reality Eliot depicted, in which morality rarely had a “standard
                    beyond hereditary custom” and religion often meant “revering every-
                    thing that was customary and respectable,” the Millite and Arnoldian ide-
                    als appear even less likely to come to fruition than the Christian ideals
                    introduced by all-too-human preachers.12 Religion is hard-won knowl-
                    edge, most frequently encountered by isolated heroines in moments of
                    intense disappointment and loneliness, when the prose of ordinary life
                    begs for poetry. In Eliot’s novels, such religion, when it appears, is radi-
                    cal, not normative. It breaks from widespread custom, from torpor, from
                    society. Arnold claims that
                             Perfection, as culture conceives it, is not possible while the individual
                             remains isolated: the individual is obliged, under pain of being stunted
                             and enfeebled in his own development if he disobeys, to carry others
                             along with him in his march towards perfection, to be continually doing
                             all he can to enlarge and increase the volume of the human stream sweeping
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000980

                                                                                                            RELIG ION               843
                      thitherward; and here, once more, it lays on us the same obligation as reli-
                      gion, which says, as Bishop Wilson has admirably put it, that “to promote
                      the kingdom of God is to increase and hasten one’s own happiness.”13
               By contrast, Eliot’s mid-century narratives of coming to religion suggest
              the painful struggle by which personal progress is achieved and, surpris-
              ingly, the enduring necessity for the Christian framework in which acts of
              selflessness and duty emerge as intelligible and compelling.
                      As we consider the centrality of “religion” to Victorian culture and
              literature beyond simple narratives of secularization, our understanding
              will be fuller and deeper if we recognize, first, the contested senses of
              the term; second, the tension between ideal and real versions of old
              and new religion, even among the most prominent agnostics; third, the
              affects associated with religion, ranging from wistful and wishful to
              despairing, bewildered, burdened, energized, relieved, freed. The
              sense of discovery that accompanies so many Victorian narratives of reli-
              gion can be ours as well, as we re-read with an eye for the active processes
              of religion-making.
                                                                      NOTES
                1. Lori Branch, “Postsecular Studies,” in The Routledge Companion to
                     Literature and Religion, ed. Mark Knight (Abingdon: Routledge,
                     2016), 96.
                2. Mary Augusta Ward, Robert Elsmere (Chicago: Belford, Clarke, and
                     Co., 1888), 649.
                3. John Stuart Mill, “Utility of Religion,” in Collected Works of John Stuart
                     Mill, Vol. 10, ed. J. M. Robson (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2006),
                     419.
                4. Mill, “Utility,” 420.
                5. Mill, “Utility,” 422.
                6. See George Eliot’s poem, “O May I Join the Choir Invisible,” readily
                     available online.
                7. Matthew Arnold, Culture and Anarchy, ed. Samuel Lipman (New
                     Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1994), 33.
                8. Arnold, Culture and Anarchy, 33.
                9. George Eliot, The Mill on the Floss, ed. Carol T. Christ (New York:
                     W. W. Norton, 1994), 239.
              10. George Eliot, Scenes of Clerical Life, ed. David Lodge (London:
                     Penguin, 1985), 320.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000980

                    844          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    11. George Eliot, Romola, ed. Andrew Sanders (London: Penguin, 1980),
                            433.
                    12. Eliot, Mill, 363–64.
                    13. Arnold, Culture, 33.
                    Rhyme
                    NAOMI LEVINE
                    O         NE enigmatic statement about rhyme appears all the time in
                               Victorian poetry criticism. It’s this: “Rhyme has been said to con-
                    tain in itself a constant appeal to Memory and Hope.”1 The statement
                    is attributed to Arthur Hallam, the critic whose early death is the subject
                    of Alfred Tennyson’s In Memoriam (1850). Hallam’s idea of rhyme has
                    long been used to explain the form of the In Memoriam stanza; in the for-
                    ward and backward movement of the abba rhymes, readers keep hearing
                    the melancholy play of memory and hope that Hallam described.2
                            Hallam’s statement has become an axiom of Victorianist close read-
                    ing, but in its original context it described a set of historical phenomena:
                    the migration of rhyme from Arabic to Provençal poetry and the cultiva-
                    tion of rhyme’s expressive properties by the troubadours. Hallam, I
                    argue, borrowed his idea from Romantic literary historiography, most
                    directly from J. C. L. Simonde de Sismondi’s De la littérature du midi de
                    l’Europe (1813; trans. 1823). This intellectual background matters, both
                    for our understanding of Victorian poetics and for our own ways of
                    approaching questions of form. It tells us, surprisingly, that in the
                    nineteenth-century imagination rhyme’s effects were tied to its origins:
                    no form without history. It also tells us that there was no such thing as
                    Victorian rhyme if “Victorian” means England and the nineteenth cen-
                    tury. Victorian rhyme was a medievalist and orientalist idea about the ori-
                    gin of European poetry, and it arose from Continental aesthetics and
                    literary history writing.
                            Few people read Sismondi’s comparative literary scholarship today.
                    It is exactly the kind of large-scale historiography that twentieth-
                    century formalism reacted against—but it was widely read in its
                    time. The book, written in a period of conversation with Germaine
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000980

