                    844          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    11. George Eliot, Romola, ed. Andrew Sanders (London: Penguin, 1980),
                            433.
                    12. Eliot, Mill, 363–64.
                    13. Arnold, Culture, 33.
                    Rhyme
                    NAOMI LEVINE
                    O         NE enigmatic statement about rhyme appears all the time in
                               Victorian poetry criticism. It’s this: “Rhyme has been said to con-
                    tain in itself a constant appeal to Memory and Hope.”1 The statement
                    is attributed to Arthur Hallam, the critic whose early death is the subject
                    of Alfred Tennyson’s In Memoriam (1850). Hallam’s idea of rhyme has
                    long been used to explain the form of the In Memoriam stanza; in the for-
                    ward and backward movement of the abba rhymes, readers keep hearing
                    the melancholy play of memory and hope that Hallam described.2
                            Hallam’s statement has become an axiom of Victorianist close read-
                    ing, but in its original context it described a set of historical phenomena:
                    the migration of rhyme from Arabic to Provençal poetry and the cultiva-
                    tion of rhyme’s expressive properties by the troubadours. Hallam, I
                    argue, borrowed his idea from Romantic literary historiography, most
                    directly from J. C. L. Simonde de Sismondi’s De la littérature du midi de
                    l’Europe (1813; trans. 1823). This intellectual background matters, both
                    for our understanding of Victorian poetics and for our own ways of
                    approaching questions of form. It tells us, surprisingly, that in the
                    nineteenth-century imagination rhyme’s effects were tied to its origins:
                    no form without history. It also tells us that there was no such thing as
                    Victorian rhyme if “Victorian” means England and the nineteenth cen-
                    tury. Victorian rhyme was a medievalist and orientalist idea about the ori-
                    gin of European poetry, and it arose from Continental aesthetics and
                    literary history writing.
                            Few people read Sismondi’s comparative literary scholarship today.
                    It is exactly the kind of large-scale historiography that twentieth-
                    century formalism reacted against—but it was widely read in its
                    time. The book, written in a period of conversation with Germaine
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000992

                                                                                                                   R HY M E         845
              de Staël and August Schlegel, traces the development of Romance-
              language literatures from their medieval beginnings. Sismondi’s
              claim is that European rhyme derived from Arabic love lyrics; when
              Provençal troubadours began to rhyme, they were learning from the
              poetry of Arabia via Al-Andalus. From the love poems of Provence,
              rhyme entered the rest of Europe. This view is known as the Arabist
              (or Hispano-Arabic) theory of rhyme, and Sismondi helped popularize
              it in the nineteenth century.3
                      I focus here on a moment in Sismondi’s history that dramatizes the
              Arabist theory and exemplifies the entanglement of formal and historical
              approaches to poetry at this time. It’s an anecdote that tantalized the
              poets: Robert Browning, Algernon Swinburne, and Ezra Pound all
              wrote verses about it. A lovelorn twelfth-century troubadour, Geoffrey
              (Jaufré) Rudel, hears of a beautiful and virtuous Countess of Tripoli.
              He falls in love with her sight unseen, sets out on a boat to find her,
              and gets sick on the journey. She learns that a poet is dying of love for
              her, and she meets him aboard the ship. They have a touching encounter
              before he is “silenced by the convulsions of death.”4 In Sismondi’s faintly
              rhyming formulation, “he was buried at Tripoli, beneath a tomb of por-
              phyry, which the countess raised to his memory, with an Arabic inscrip-
              tion.”5 Other accounts elaborate on the countess’s grief: she becomes
              a nun and spends the rest of her life devoted to Rudel’s memory.
                      This story is about love in solitude and over long distance. For Rudel
              the love is prospective and for the countess it is retrospective, but in both
              cases the moment of their meeting is just a blip in a longer story of long-
              ing. The story had been told before, but in Sismondi’s historiography it
              takes on special narrative significance. Rudel is not just one of the first
              troubadours, and he’s not just the personification of amour de loin—“dis-
              tant love”—a prototype and extreme variant of courtly love. He is also a
              crucial figure in the transnational history of rhyme, a poet who turns
              Arabic verse forms into Provençal lyric.
                      Sismondi introduces Rudel as his narrative pivots from Arabic to
              Provençal prosody. He writes, “In Arabic poetry . . . the second verse of
              each couplet frequently terminates with the same word, and this repeti-
              tion has been, likewise, adopted by the Provençals. A remarkable exam-
              ple of it may be found in some verses of Geoffrey de Rudel,”6 and
              then he tells Rudel’s story and presents a poem that resembles the
              Arabic couplet form (the ghazal) he has just described. Here is
              Thomas Roscoe’s translation of Sismondi’s Rudel poem, which appeared
              alongside versions in Provençal and French. Note the play of monorhyme
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000992

                    846          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    against repetition, with every other line landing insistently on the word
                    “afar” [luench/loin].
                             Angry and sad shall be my way,
                             If I behold not her afar,
                             And yet I know not when that day
                             Shall rise, for still she dwells afar.
                             God! Who hast formed this fair array
                             Of worlds, and placed my love afar,
                             Strengthen my heart with hope, I pray,
                             Of seeing her I love afar [etc.]7
                     On the page, the repeating word “afar” seems to denote the spatial and
                    temporal distance that the other rhymes reach across. The poem doesn’t
                    just describe amour de loin: it convinces us that rhyme intrinsically is amour
                    de loin—a kind of long-distance longing.
                            The poem appears to corroborate Sismondi’s historical argument
                    about the transmission of rhyme through the Mediterranean, and it
                    helps make his case for the elegiac and erotic properties of rhyme. It
                    demonstrates, through the poem’s material verse structure, both the
                    genealogy and the poetics he is promoting.8 When Sismondi comes to
                    some general observations about rhyme, he makes its formalization of
                    troubadour love explicit. The troubadours, adapting the rhymes of
                    Arabic poetry into a variety of stanzaic forms, found “the secret and mys-
                    terious associations” between modern prosody and the emotions. When
                    the troubadour “uttered his bold, nervous, and resounding rhymes; or in
                    tender and voluptuous strains, expressed the vehemence of his love,” he
                    was discovering that “[r]hyme is an appeal to our memory and to our
                    expectations” (“La rime est un appel au souvenir et à l’espérance”).9
                            Which brings us back to the aphoristic sentence of Arthur Hallam’s
                    that took on the status of a theory in the nineteenth century: “Rhyme has
                    been said to contain in itself a constant appeal to Memory and Hope.”
                    On the face of it, Hallam’s statement addresses rhyme’s formal and affec-
                    tive qualities only. It tells us that the distance between two rhyme words is
                    a space of desire: the first word bends toward the second—longs for it,
                    even—and the second word when we reach it remembers the first (and
                    its longing), maybe with a retrospective longing of its own. As readers we
                    participate in this desire, so that when we read rhymes the hoping and
                    remembering and longing are also ours. Hallam’s is an account of
                    rhyme on the page and in the body and mind; it seems resolutely ahistori-
                    cal. But of course, it isn’t. What Victorian rhyme contains in itself is stories
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000992

                                                                                                                   R HY M E         847
              about the history of rhyme: Rudel’s hope and the Countess of Tripoli’s
              memory; Provence’s worship of Arabic poetry; the way the troubadours
              tuned Arabic rhyme to their loving and longing feelings. Hallam’s
              English theory of rhyme, borrowed from Sismondi, is actually a dream of
              rhyme’s many translations—the route by which Victorian rhyme arrived.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Arthur Hallam, “The Influence of Italian Upon English Literature,” in
                   The Writings of Arthur Hallam, ed. T. Vail Motter (New York: Oxford
                   University Press, 1943), 222, n. 10.
              2. Coventry Patmore, review of In Memoriam by Alfred Tennyson, in North
                   British Review 13, no. 26 (1850): 545–46. See also, for example,
                   Christopher Ricks, Tennyson (Berkeley: University of California Press,
                   1989), 296; and Seamus Perry, Alfred Tennyson (Horndon: Northcote
                   House, 2005), 136.
              3. See Roger Boase, The Origin and Meaning of Courtly Love: A Critical Study
                   of European Scholarship (Manchester: Manchester University Press,
                   1977); María Rosa Menocal, The Arabic Role in Medieval Literary
                   History: A Forgotten Heritage (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
                   Press, 1987); and Roberto M. Dainotto, Europe (In Theory) (Durham:
                   Duke University Press, 2007).
              4. J. C. L. Simonde de Sismondi, Historical View of the Literature of the South
                   of Europe, Vol. 1, trans. Thomas Roscoe (London: Henry Colburn,
                   1823), 105.
              5. Sismondi, Historical View, 105. Thanks to Stefanie Markovits and Ben
                   Glaser for hearing this rhyme.
              6. Sismondi, Historical View, 104.
              7. Sismondi, Historical View, 106.
              8. Sismondi’s version is no longer considered part of Rudel’s corpus; see
                   the variants in Rupert T. Pickens, ed., The Songs of Jaufré Rudel
                   (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1978), 150ff.,
                   which follow a different rhyme scheme. On the unreliability of
                   Rudel’s sixteenth-century editor, see Boase, The Origin, 11–12.
              9. Sismondi, Historical View, 116–17; Sismondi, De la littérature du midi de
                   l’Europe, vol. 1 (Paris: Treuttel et Würtz, 1813), 115. See also
                   Germaine de Staël’s observation that rhyme “is the image of hope
                   and of memory” in Germany, Vol. 1 (London: John Murray, 1813), 289.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:48:52, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318000992

