                    854          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    3. “Constructing                    Scientific        Communities,”                    https://conscicom.org.
                          (accessed 2 May 2018).
                    4. For example, the discussions and presentations of the AHRC-funded
                          seminar on analogy led by Alice Jenkins in Cambridge in 2015 or
                          Sally Shuttleworth’s recording of the movement of literary texts across
                          works of psychology in The Mind of the Child: Child Development in
                          Literature, Science and Medicine, 1840–1900 (Oxford: Oxford
                          University Press, 2010).
                    5. Jennifer Calkins’s article on reading Moby Dick in the light of current
                          cetological research is an excellent example of such work: Jennifer
                          Calkins, “How Is It Then with the Whale? Using Scientific Data to
                          Explore Textual Embodiment,” Configurations 18, no. 1–2 (2010):
                          31–47. See also John Holmes, “Consilience Rebalanced: Edward
                          O. Wilson on Science, the Humanities and the Meaning of Human
                          Existence,” Journal of Literature and Science 10, no. 1 (2017): 5–10. My
                          own forthcoming article on nineteenth-century sleep offers a further
                          new methodology: Martin Willis, “Sleeping Science Fictionally:
                          Nineteenth-Century Utopian Fictions and Sleep Research,” Osiris 34,
                          no. 1 (2019).
                    6. James Castell, Keir Waddington, and Martin Willis, “Cardiff Science
                          Humanities,” https://cardiffsciencehumanities.org (accessed 2 May
                          2018).
                    Science Fiction
                    JOHN PLOTZ
                    F      OUR decades ago, Darko Suvin floated a scholarly approach to sci-
                           ence fiction that largely still prevails, emphasizing the genre’s reliance,
                    stretching back beyond Jules Verne to Mary Shelley and beyond, on a
                    technological “novum.”1 Suvin emphasized the capacity of science fiction
                    to challenge readers’ conceptual norms by way of what (in a Shklovskyian
                    vein) he called “cognitive estrangement.” Most critical debate in the inter-
                    vening years has focused on his account of the “cognitive estrangement”
                    itself: including Seo-Young Chu’s recent provocative notion that “science
                    fiction is a representational technology powered by a combination of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800102X

                                                                                              S C I E N C E FI C T I ON             855
              lyrical and narrative forces that enable science fiction to generate mimetic
              accounts of cognitively estranging referents.”2
                      However, recent taxonomic work points to ways that the genre’s self-
              definitions and constituent elements have varied enormously over the
              past century—and helpfully highlights some of the problems entailed
              in Suvin’s reliance on an explicitly or implicitly technological “novum”
              as the launching point for that estrangement.3 Fredric Jameson’s decep-
              tively simple account of temporality in SF has implications that highlight
              the formal congruity, and the intertextual inheritance, that aligns science
              fiction with the various realist prose genres that it follows. Jameson even
              finds a compelling way to bridge the space between the Romantic-era
              historical novel and the “children of Wells” (that is, the early twentieth-
              century upsurge in technology-based “hard” science fiction that
              culminated in the largely American Golden Age of Asimov, Heinlein,
              and Clarke). Jameson astutely argues that “the late nineteenth-century
              invention of SF correlates to Walter Scott’s invention of the modern histor-
              ical novel in Waverley (1814), marking the emergence of a second—
              industrial—stage of historical consciousness after that first dawning sense
              of the historicity of society so rudely awakened by the French
              Revolution.”4 In other words, what Scott did for “historical time,” science
              fiction did not only for the geological deep time of Lyell and Darwin
              (for those who doubt, Elie Berthet’s 1876 Parisian caveman romance,
              Romans Pré-Historiques, is worth a gander) but also, by the early twentieth
              century, the cosmic vastness of Einsteinian time.
                      Jameson and Roger Luckhurst’s work may be the spark for a needed
              paradigm shift. The birth of both science fiction and prose fantasy as new
              (or newly refashioned) genres in Britain in the 1890s—along with the vir-
              tually simultaneous rise of a new sort of Lovecraftian horror writing—
              should prompt some reflection on the speculative genres’ Darwinian
              rather than Einsteinian roots: that is, the debt that fantasy and SF authors
              owe to the fin de siècle’s vastly expanded conception of the interpenetra-
              tion of the human and nonhuman realms. In the late nineteenth cen-
              tury, evolutionary theory and the emergent “epistemic virtue” of
              objectivity come to shape not only the deterministic logic of naturalism,
              but also the otherworldly permutations of fantasy and science fiction,
              which register a scalar shift in humanity’s relationship to a more expan-
              sive space and time—and to human interiors suddenly accessible in a
              range of new ways.5
                      Science fiction (initially styled “scientific romance” at the time of
              Verne and Wells, later “scientifiction” by the trendsetting American
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800102X

                    856          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    periodicals edited by Hugo Gernsback and turned into “science fiction”
                    proper by successors like John W. Campbell) explores the nonhuman
                    within human existence—it is a crucial bellwether of changing human
                    relations to the object as well as the animal world. Like naturalism, fan-
                    tasy and Lovecraft-era horror, science fiction offered one way to make
                    sense of the chasm between events—nonhuman in origin, scale and dura-
                    tion—and human experience—i.e., meaning-making distinctively shaped
                    by individual subjectivity. These post-Darwinian experiments are unified
                    by their focus on the cognitive “contact zone” where nonhuman forces
                    impinge on the limits of human reason or imagination. With their
                    advent, a vernacular thing theory unfolded—the legacy of which persists
                    even into the present day, subtly shaping various forms of “posthuman-
                    ism” and “object-oriented ontology.”6
                            Taken together, recent accounts of the rise of fantasy as a modern
                    prose genre, of the early days of science fiction, and of naturalism’s affec-
                    tive innovations and explicit inversion of Idealism suggest that each genre
                    was grappling with the resistance of a nonhuman universe to prior
                    anthropocentric mandates and ontological presumptions.7 The science
                    fiction of H. G. Wells (“Realist of the Fantastic” was Conrad’s apt title
                    for him) and his successors worldwide (but especially in Great Britain
                    and the US) is a complex and subtly varied response to the uncomfort-
                    able late nineteenth-century realization that man can no longer be the
                    proper measure, nor perhaps even the proper study, of mankind.
                    Registering the immensity of alien space and time even within the puta-
                    tively knowable human realm, sublimates or sublimely displaces ordinary
                    human agency within a vaster cosmos.8 Simultaneously, the new/old
                    genre of prose fantasy (sparked by the strange world-making late
                    romances of William Morris, and then theorized by J. R. R. Tolkien as
                    “subcreation” or the making of “secondary worlds”) offers the marvelous
                    as an exemplary subset of human life, life as it might be lived without the
                    impedances of material actuality.9 Naturalism, fantasy, and science fiction
                    seem intuitively to be wildly disparate from one another—yet the fin de
                    siècle efflorescence of enchanted and speculative tales is fueled by the
                    same concerns about the insistent actuality of the material world as is
                    disenchanted and determinist naturalism.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Darko Suvin, “On the Poetics of the Science Fiction Genre,” College
                          English 34, no. 3 (1972): 372–82.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800102X

                                                                                              S C I E N C E FI C T I ON             857
              2. Seo-Young Chu, Do Metaphors Dream of Literal Sleep?: A Science-Fictional
                   Theory of Representation (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2010).
              3. Cf. Roger Luckhurst, Science Fiction (Cambridge: Polity, 2005) and
                   John Rieder, Science Fiction and the Mass Cultural Genre System
                   (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 2017).
              4. Fredric Jameson, “In Hyperspace,” London Review of Books, 37, no. 17
                   (2015): 17–22.
              5. The term “epistemic virtue” comes from Lorraine Daston and Peter
                   Galison, Objectivity (New York: Zone Books, 2007).
              6. See Graham Harman, “The Well-Wrought Broken Hammer:
                   Object-Oriented Literary Criticism,” New Literary History 43, no. 2
                   (2012): 183–203; Eugene Thacker, In the Dust of This Planet (Ropley:
                   Zero, 2011); Matthew A. Taylor, Universes Without Us (Minneapolis:
                   University of Minnesota Press, 2013).
              7. On fantasy as a modern prose genre, see Michael Saler, As If: Modern
                   Enchantment and the Literary Prehistory of Virtual Reality (New York:
                   Oxford University Press, 2012), and Jamie Williamson, The Evolution
                   of Modern Fantasy: From Antiquarianism to the Ballantine Adult Fantasy
                   Series (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015). On the early days of sci-
                   ence fiction, see David Wittenberg, Time Travel: the Popular Philosophy of
                   Narrative (New York: Fordham University Press, 2013), as well as
                   Luckhurst and Rieder. On naturalism’s innovations, see Fredric
                   Jameson, The Antinomies of Realism (London: Verso, 2013), and Toril
                   Moi, Henrik Ibsen and the Birth of Modernism: Art, Theater, Philosophy
                   (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006).
              8. Matthew Beaumont’s effort to link the rise of speculative, scientific,
                   and utopic fictions to the way that at the fin de siècle time itself
                   seems to be “off course, beside itself” sells short the complex appa-
                   ratus that both science fiction and fantasy offer for managing
                   human temporality within a temporally and spatially vast cosmos.
                   In fact, early twentieth-century speculative fiction of Wells and his
                   ilk may be linked to the experimental, off-kilter realism of late
                   George Eliot and Henry James. Wells’s half-departures from the
                   actual suggest a new way of understanding modernism’s debt to
                   that fin de siècle moment, when speculative fiction of various
                   kinds flourished not in distinction from realism but alongside it,
                   borrowing its form and its tropes. Matthew Beaumont, The Spectre
                   of Utopia: Utopian and Science Fictions at the Fin de Siècle (Bern:
                   Peter Lang, 2012).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800102X

                    858          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    9. J. R. R. Tolkien, “On Fairy-Stories,” Tree and Leaf (Boston: Houghton
                          Mifflin, 1964), 3–84; Mark J. P Wolf, Building Imaginary Worlds: The
                          Theory and History of Subcreation (New York: Routledge, 2012).
                    Sensation Fiction
                    MARLENE TROMP
                    I    N spite of our recognition of the blurriness of generic boundaries, we
                          tend to reassert them where sensation fiction is concerned. There is
                    value in understanding sensation in new ways—and potential political
                    consequences when we do not. This is especially significant now that
                    our critical study of sensation fiction has matured to the point that it is
                    possible to offer reviews of the critical field, like those by Anne-Marie
                    Beller and Mark Knight.1 Even the most important work in the field
                    on sensation has often reinforced the binary between sensation and real-
                    ism.2 The boldest moves have been made by scholars like Richard
                    Nemesvari, who argues that Hardy understands and deploys melodrama
                    and sensation in order to offer cultural and ideological critiques.3 While
                    challenging our sense of the genre’s impact and engagement with realist
                    fiction, it distinguishes sensation as a distinct mode. Emily Steinlight
                    offers a similar analysis of Eliot’s fiction and realist fiction more broadly
                    (as I did in The Private Rod).4
                            In spite of the careful way in which critics seek to navigate the com-
                    plex terrains of generic meaning, even these studies have persisted in
                    treating sensation fiction as an excessive hyper-genre of the “not
                    real”—a bit of flash and dazzle that emerged (or could be consciously
                    deployed) in relation to or in realist fiction for effect. This seems striking
                    given the fact that we have learned to explore real cultural phenomena
                    like marital violence, the body, property law, and science in new ways
                    from sensation fiction. While sensation often supplies the leverage to
                    read against the grain, we often (perhaps unconsciously) return it to
                    its generic box when we have completed the task.
                            One of the early critical treatments of sensation sought to blur the
                    borders between genres. In his 1982 essay on sensation fiction, Patrick
                    Brantlinger makes a Derridean argument that it is “impossible not to
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S106015031800102X

