                                                                                                 TRANSIMPERIAL                      925
              Transimperial
              SUKANYA BANERJEE
                     HERE is no dearth, as we know, of references to “empire” in our dis-
              T      cussion of the Victorians. The term “transimperial,” however,
              remains relatively underused. This anomaly, I suggest, can be attributed
              to our critical understanding of the category of “empire” itself, an under-
              standing that has more readily (and somewhat counterintuitively) lent
              itself to “global,” “transatlantic,” or “transnational” critical approaches
              rather than a transimperial one. Empire, it can be argued, functions
              more in a descriptive mode than an analytic. It provides an expanded
              canvas or site for examining “British” actions, exchanges, or negotiations
              and yields a logic that is more additive than comparative or contiguous.
              This may be so because our assumptions of “Victorian,” British, and
              “nation” seem to cohere along a continuum that fuses a geoethnically
              bound sense of place with time.1 References to empire, therefore, pro-
              ceed along an accretional logic that includes what lies beyond the
              “nation” without adequately querying who or what constitutes
              “Victorian” or “British” in the first place, or if the idea of a defined nation
              is not a tad bit anachronistic in the context of the nineteenth century. In
              fact, even as ideas of the global or transnational valuably enhance the
              scope of Victorian studies, they can do so without necessarily troubling
              those spatial and temporal solidities that cohere in the name of “nation”
              (which tends to conflate “British” with “Victorian”).
                      It is significant, then, to consider how empire can conceptually put
              pressure on the idea of the nation if we adopt a transimperial analytical
              framework that places Britain in constant tension and connection with its
              imperial constituencies (particularly those marked as the “non-West”) by
              continually questioning the discrete solidities of the (British) nation and
              placing it in an inexhaustible relation of contiguity and interconstitutive-
              ness with the empire “out there.”
                      To be sure, for nearly two decades, literary scholars as well as histo-
              rians of the British empire have prodded the boundaries of the “British”
              nation and, relatedly, also argued for the mutually constitutive nature of
              colony and metropole.2 Empire, they have suggested, was not necessarily
              “away” from “home” and neither was metropolitan Englishness a discrete
              formation that could be considered in splendid isolation. Rather, the two
              need to be studied in tandem and in terms of a relation that is centrip-
              etal. The full potential of this valuable line of enquiry is yet to be realized;
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001195

                    926          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    in fact, it has been somewhat overridden by the rubric of the global or
                    transnational. This is not to deny that the latter two categories have
                    gone a long way in marking an expansive turn in the study of, amongst
                    other things, nationally-based literatures. Indeed, they have opened up
                    important pathways in Victorian scholarship. But it is ironic that in taking
                    the so-called global turn, Victorian studies also seems to shy away from
                    fully exploring how the decidedly non-national setting of empire—
                    which, for better or worse, Victorians claimed for their own—not only
                    renders empire an important category of analysis but also renders the
                    transimperial a key heuristic for a global framework.3
                            In accounting for the salience of the transimperial, it is important to
                    keep in mind that if we are to think about the nineteenth century in
                    terms of its longue durée and in terms of the recursive cycles of capital
                    accumulation that Giovanni Arrighi draws out, then it becomes clear
                    that, even as each cycle of accumulation from the sixteenth century
                    onward relies on an inter-state system of trade, the British cycle of accu-
                    mulation of the nineteenth century (which, incidentally, extends beyond
                    a hundred years) is marked by what Arrighi refers to as “tribute” from
                    Britain’s empire.4 Even as this tribute is certainly not characteristic of
                    the British cycle alone, it denotes a more complex and layered geopolit-
                    ical configuration than the isomorphic statal system that the transna-
                    tional assumes, even if to depart from it. In fact, the terrain of empire,
                    where the “nation” itself is in various stages of making, unmaking, and
                    nonmaking (and we tend to forget the latter two because of the nation-
                    alist teleology that the hindsight of the twentieth century gives us) pro-
                    vides a more apt lens for studying beneath, above, and beyond the
                    nation. Such is true both of the chronological period of the nineteenth
                    century as well as our present moment, which is not just about nation-
                    based sovereignties, and for which the “transnational”—perhaps a term
                    more apt for the post-World War I twentieth century world—seems a
                    somewhat weak moniker. In other words, the nineteenth century world
                    loops into the twenty first; perhaps we are all Victorian, hence all the
                    more reason to think about the transimperial.
                            I suggest transimperial as a keyword that is as much about inter-
                    imperial relations as about the relationality between multiple constituen-
                    cies through and across empire. A transimperial lens of study, while cer-
                    tainly not valorizing “empire,” nonetheless redirects attention toward,
                    rather than away, from it. In so doing, it keeps alive the asymmetries, ten-
                    sions, and collaborations that held/hold dispersed constituencies
                    together. In other words, the transimperial genealogizes abiding
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001195

                                                                                                 TRANSIMPERIAL                      927
              relations (often iniquitous) that tend to get glossed over or flattened by a
              too-easy embrace of the global.
                      A transimperial approach posits a relation of comparison, connec-
              tion, and contiguity between different imperial constituencies through
              two methodological departures. First, it views the “non-West” in terms
              of coevality, an attribute that is not usually accorded to the episteme of
              the colonial. In fact, an implicit assumption of lag precipitates a cultural-
              ist disavowal of the non-West, a disavowal that interrupts otherwise puta-
              tively continuous political identities (for instance, after 1858, Indians
              were subjects of the British Crown, notionally on par with Britons).
              Consequently, a transimperial approach also deflects attention from
              the emphasis on flow and mobility that the transnational otherwise priv-
              ileges. This is not to deny the importance of various kinds of flow—of
              peoples, goods, capital, commodities, texts, and ideas; rather, it is to
              draw attention to that which has not been so readily mobile—indigenous
              literary production in non-Western languages, for instance—even as it is
              marked by mobile processes.
                      A transimperial framework, then, affords the possibility of bringing
              together nineteenth century English and, say, Urdu literature not only
              in terms of parallels or similarities, but also as operating along the
              same interrelated plane of modernity, for which “Victorian” can function
              more as an ensemble or portmanteau term rather than a salutary badge
              of inclusion.5 In this, sameness becomes not so much a measure of
              homogeneity as of proximate commonality, one that the transimperial
              can aim to route in all its tensions and negotiations with a systematicity
              that does not rely on an expansive gesture of munificence alone.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. It is such a continuum that perhaps occasions Kate Flint’s unease with
                   the term “Victorian.” See “Why ‘Victorian’?: A Response,” Victorian
                   Studies, 47, no. 2 (2005): 230–39.
              2. See, among others, Antoinette Burton, “Who Needs the Nation:
                   Interrogating ‘British’ History,” in Cultures of Empire: A Reader:
                   Colonisers in Britain and the Empire in the Nineteenth and Twentieth
                   Centuries, ed. Catherine Hall (Manchester: Manchester University
                   Press, 2000): 137–53; Simon Gikandi, Maps of Englishness: Writing
                   Identity in the Age of Colonialism (New York: Columbia University
                   Press, 1997); Bill Schwarz, “The Expansion and Contraction of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001195

                    928          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                          England,” in The Expansion of England: Race, Ethnicity, and Cultural
                          History, ed. Bill Schwarz (London: Routledge, 1996): 1–9.
                    3. See, among others, Regenia Gagnier, “Introduction: Victorian studies,
                          world literatures, and globalization,” Critical Quarterly, 55, no.1 (2013):
                          1–8, Sharon Marcus, “Same Difference? Transnationalism,
                          Comparative Literature, and Victorian Studies,” Victorian Studies, 45,
                          no. 4 (2003): 677–86; Pablo Mukherjee, “Introduction: Victorian
                          World Literatures,” The Yearbook of English Studies, 41, no. 2 (2011):
                          1–19.
                    4. Giovanni Arrighi, The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power, and the
                          Origins of Our Times (London: Verso, 1994), 55.
                    5. Here, I depart from Flint’s formulation of the relation between
                          “Victorian” and modernity (“Why ‘Victorian’?: A Response,” 233).
                    Uchronia
                    AARON WORTH
                    I    N 1857, the French philosopher Charles Renouvier imagined that the
                          Roman Empire had never become Christian, in a work titled Uchronie,
                    a term Renouvier invented to designate “[une] utopie des temps
                    passés”—a utopia of past time.1 While his tale (as this phrase suggests)
                    was set in the historical past, literary scholars today tend to employ
                    “uchronia” in a more expansive sense, as an umbrella category compris-
                    ing alternate history stories, parallel worlds stories, and tales involving
                    “future uchronias”; as Amy Ransom notes, “Just as the ou-topos, the
                    no-where of utopia, may be either good (eutopian) or bad (dystopian),
                    so may the ou-chronos rewrite the past, explore the future or lie parallel
                    to the reader’s present.”2 In our own time, of course, uchronian narra-
                    tives have never been more popular—at the time of this writing, two of
                    the most-discussed television programs on air are adaptations of Philip
                    K. Dick’s The Man in the High Castle and Margaret Atwood’s The
                    Handmaid’s Tale—while the tendency to think of reality in terms of a
                    branching of multiple “forking paths” (in Borges’s phrase) has entered
                    into our cognitive habitus. Until recently, the emergence of uchronian
                    themes in fiction has been largely discussed in connection with the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:49:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001195

