                                                                                                            VISUALITY               933
              by our capacity to make mental pictures, both consciously and—a topic of
              wide and perennial interest—in dreams. The 1863 translation of Emanuel
              Swedenborg’s Arcana Cœlestia (1749–56) further pushes the claims of inter-
              nal vision by writing of “the visuality of the internal man, which sees from
              the light of heaven.”3 The importance of imaginative visualization is insep-
              arable from the penning and reading of literary texts.
                      One consequence of the fact that the term “visuality” was not widely
              employed by the Victorians—although Carlyle himself repeated it in var-
              ious contexts—is that using it can seem like imposing a much more
              recent set of theoretical assumptions. Yet it’s important to realize that
              all the components that we now cluster under the rubric of “visuality”
              were, indeed, not just present to the Victorians, but were endlessly dis-
              cussed by them in terms that have become formative to the questions
              we ask of the Victorian period today, and as we reconstruct, so far as
              we can, how the Victorians may have seen their world.
                                                                      NOTES
              1. Michael Baxandall, Painting and Experience in Fifteenth-Century Italy. A
                   Primer in the Social History of Pictorial Style, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford
                   University Press, 1988), 29.
              2. Thomas Carlye, “The Hero as Poet,” in On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and
                   The Heroic in History. Six Lectures, 2nd ed. (London: Chapman and
                   Hall, 1842), 144.
              3. Emanuel Swedenborg, Arcana Cœlestia. The Heavenly Mysteries contained
                   in the Holy Scripture, or Word of the Lord, Unfolded, 12 vols. (London: The
                   Swedenborg Society, 1863), 7: 94.
              Visuality
              JONATHAN POTTER
              S     URVEYING work on Victorian visual culture for this journal twenty
                     years ago, Kevin Z. Moore suggested: “there was no coherent politics
              of vision in the nineteenth century; there was only an explosion of visual
              devices and their uses by whoever had the wherewithal to put them to
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001225

                    934          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    use.”1 By 1997, it seemed to Moore that research had moved from previ-
                    ous, more abstract (and literary) considerations of “poetics” to more
                    solid historical ground: “telescoping terms or microscopic visions once
                    understood idealistically and poetically are now understood empirically,
                    historically, and cognitively.” But this shift also disrupted the relations
                    between historical subjects so that in reviewing the literature it appeared
                    that there was no coherency at all, only an atomized “explosion” of indi-
                    vidual objects within singular contexts. Twenty years later, Moore’s com-
                    ment remains apt since these many readings (upon which we can now
                    add many more), do not offer much coherency; they remain divergent,
                    fugitive, and often contradictory across different contexts. Whereas in sci-
                    ence one might ask if a study’s results are generalizable, we seem to have
                    acquired a distaste for generalizing our findings.
                            It is also clear that the development of our theoretical understand-
                    ing has not kept pace with our historical and literary work. It is still rou-
                    tine, for example, to expect works on Victorian visuality to refer to
                    Jonathan Crary’s Techniques of the Observer (1990).2 While this is influential
                    and fine scholarship, is the implication really that, nearly thirty years
                    later, there have been no significant refinements and developments to
                    this last great theorization of nineteenth-century visuality? Few generaliz-
                    able theories or narratives have emerged in recent years through which
                    we might compose our detailed historical knowledge into a broader
                    understanding of Victorian visuality. There is obviously value in the pan-
                    theon of paradigmatic figures from last-century’s groundbreaking work
                    (principally the flâneur and the panopticon, in addition to Crary’s
                    work on subjective and embodied vision) but equally obviously, they do
                    not apply to all circumstances or help explain all phenomena. We
                    have, thankfully, moved away from such theoretical contortions that
                    might, for instance, conclude that “the magic lantern was magic because
                    it was a panoptic machine for enforcing the status quo,”3 or which felt
                    compelled to theorize static panoramas as either analogous or antitheti-
                    cal to the panopticon (as many otherwise-brilliant works on the subject
                    have). But in moving away from these rather forced theoretical readings,
                    we have not found equivalent useful replacements. This is not to say
                    there has been no theoretical work, only that it has tended to stand
                    alone and, either implicitly or explicitly, resisted broader applications.
                            It is with some irony that I write this for Victorian Literature and Culture,
                    given that a related and recent debate in Victorian studies has revolved
                    around the perceived dominance of literary studies over other disciplinary
                    approaches. Certainly, studies of visuality might be charged with being overly
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001225

                                                                                                            VISUALITY               935
              literary at times, which is precisely what Peter K. Andersson has pointed out,
              while making a larger case for expanding our collective assumptions and
              approaches—the examples he draws on, intriguingly, are primarily photo-
              graphic.4 Whereas Moore considered that in 1997 visuality studies had
              evolved away from literary optics, Andersson suggests that this evolution
              has not yet gone far enough, that our assumptions and methods are, as it
              were, stuck in a rut. There seems, to me at least, a need not to move away
              from literary studies to historical studies (or vice versa which is what one
              might take the V21 Collective to have broadly suggested), but a development
              of a more fully interdisciplinary framework with which to situate our cultural
              and historical work. This is not a new notion: in 2004 Margaret Cohen and
              Anne Higonnet made a cogent call for “studies of the shared edges between
              textuality and visuality, and even more so between modes of visuality.”5
                      In this respect there is a new trend gradually coming into view which is
              a movement towards using intertextual connections to link visual experi-
              ences as discourses. This makes sense since, while we have many visual arte-
              facts from the Victorian period to gaze upon (although not always quite so
              many as we might wish), it is primarily through Victorian texts that we
              understand what the Victorians saw (and how and why) when they gazed
              upon those artefacts. If the bulk of our knowledge of Victorian visualities
              comes through visual experience articulated via text, then it stands to rea-
              son that we might attempt to reconstruct the interrelations between these
              experiences by mapping textual relations. That said, Andersson is right to
              point to a general overreliance on certain kinds of sources (“Unless
              Victorian scholars do some soul-searching concerning their reliance on
              metropolitan, elitist, and, not least, exclusively British sources, this disci-
              pline will keep presenting a biased picture of a historical period.”).6
                      In hindsight this approach can be recognized as long ago as 1995 when
              Terry Castle showed us the value of thinking about visualities as textually
              mediated cultural discourses in her work on the phantasmagoria.7
              Similarly, three of the key works of the 2000s adopted a similar approach:
              Kate Flint’s The Victorians and the Visual Imagination (2008), Marina
              Warner’s Phantasmagoria (2006), and Isobel Armstrong’s Victorian
              Glassworlds (2008) all offer invaluable readings of cross-media cultural dis-
              courses.8 This has been more explicitly theorized in recent work: Erkki
              Huhtamo’s explication of “discursive panoramas,” for example, provides
              a model for how visual technologies, media, and experiences might be
              organized into discourses.9 Shelly Jarenski, in particular, has expanded
              on this in Immersive Words: Mass Media, Visuality, and American Literature,
              1839–1893 (2015), as has, to a lesser extent, Marit Grøtta in Baudelaire’s
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001225

                    936          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    Media Aesthetics: The Gaze of the Flâneur and Nineteenth-Century Media
                    (2015).10 It is probably too early to tell if this will become a major shift in
                    scholarship on visuality but it has the potential to address some of the the-
                    oretical challenges thrown up by our existing body of research.
                             One of the great virtues of conceptualizing Victorian visuality as a
                    pluralism of discourses is that not only might these fluctuate and shift
                    from one context to another (in the way that a shared metaphor shifts
                    across texts) but there remains space for individual agency. Indeed, indi-
                    viduals might move between, combine, or alter discourses as they see fit.
                    These discourses do not deny the plurality of the “explosion of visual
                    devices and their uses,” as Moore put it, but they do make room for a plu-
                    ralistic and multifaceted narrative that, in overlapping itself, might even
                    be composed into a set of coherent theorizations that can be meaning-
                    fully applied across contexts.
                                                                            NOTES
                       1. Kevin Z. Moore, “Viewing the Victorians: Recent Research on
                            Victorian Visuality,” Victorian Literature and Culture 25, no. 2 (1997):
                            367–85, 374.
                       2. Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in
                            the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990).
                       3. Sally B. Palmer, “Projecting the Gaze: The Magic Lantern, Cultural
                            Discipline, and Villette,” Victorian Review, 32, no. 1 (2006): 18–40, 27.
                       4. Peter K. Andersson, “How Civilized Were the Victorians?” Journal of
                            Victorian Culture, 20, no. 4 (2015): 439–52.
                       5. Margaret Cohen and Anne Higonnet, “Complex Culture,” in The
                            Nineteenth-Century Visual Culture Reader, ed. Vanessa R. Schwartz and
                            Jeannene Przyblyski (London: Routledge, 2004), 24.
                       6. Andersson, “How Civilized,” 452.
                       7. Terry Castle, The Female Thermometer: Eighteenth-Century Culture and the
                            Invention of the Uncanny (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).
                       8. Kate Flint, The Victorians and the Visual Imagination (Cambridge:
                            Cambridge University Press, 2008); Marina Warner, Phantasmagoria:
                            Spirit Visions, Metaphors, and Media into the Twenty-first Century
                            (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006); Isobel Armstrong,
                            Victorian Glassworlds: Glass Culture and the Imagination 1830–1880
                            (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).
                       9. Erkki Huhtamo, Illusions in Motion: A Media Archaeology of the Moving
                            Panorama and Related Spectacles (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2013), 331–61.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001225

                                                                                                            VISUALITY               937
              10. Shelly Jarenski, Immersive Words: Mass Media, Visuality, and American
                     Literature, 1839–1893 (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press,
                     2015) and Marit Grøtta, Baudelaire’s Media Aesthetics: The Gaze of the
                     Flâneur and Nineteenth-Century Media (London: Bloomsbury, 2015).
              Visuality
              RACHEL TEUKOLSKY
              I   F vision was the master-sense of the nineteenth century, then scholars
                   today have worked to critique that hegemony. Following Michel
              Foucault, they have shown how items of Victorian visual culture chan-
              neled the power of science, medicine, or the State in enforcing social
              norms. The mug shot, the colonial archive, the eugenic visual experi-
              ment, the photographed hysteric: all of these served to document and
              regulate what Foucault calls the “anatomo-politics of the human body.”1
                      The twentieth-century hostility to the visual sense for its associations
              with domination and control has something in common with nineteenth-
              century texts that challenged the deceptive quality of appearances in
              favor of inner truths.2 As Kate Flint notes, even while Victorian fiction lav-
              ishly recreated “the visible details of a crowded material world,” that
              vision was constantly being contested by fiction that “encouraged readers
              to think, critically and skeptically, about the category of the visual itself.”3
              This skepticism expressed itself in “a refusal to be satisfied with the rep-
              resentation of surfaces.”4 Jane Eyre exemplifies just this kind of suspicion,
              as it proposes a moral gaze that sees through deceitful, alluring surfaces.
              When the young Mr. Rochester meets Bertha Mason for the first time, he
              is ensnared by the mirage of her beauty, as she is shown off to him by
              scheming family members. Only after their marriage will he learn the ter-
              rifying truth about her character. By contrast, “plain Jane” possesses no
              external beauty; her attractions emanate from within. Victorian novels
              often teach us to disbelieve illusionistic or attractive surfaces, encourag-
              ing us to seek deeper meaning beyond the visible.
                      Writers and thinkers from the nineteenth century onward can there-
              fore be seen as united in accusing the visual sense of immorality, critiqu-
              ing its intrinsic superficiality and reductiveness, its adherence to mere
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001225

