                    942          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    War
                    NASSER MUFTI
                    J    O has dirty hands. And readers of Bleak House (1853) know the impor-
                         tance of their filth: they spread disease, scar the virtuous, disclose dirty
                    secrets, and point to the necessity for domestic reform over the civilizing
                    mission. The work of Michel Foucault has allowed us to appreciate the dis-
                    tinctly modern form of sovereignty that Jo’s hands wield. Texts like
                    Discipline and Punish and The History of Sexuality: An Introduction, and
                    their introjection into British literary studies in the 1980s, have taught us
                    how because there is nothing special about Jo (there are countless like
                    him “dying around us every day”), the population that he belongs to
                    must be “managed, inserted into systems of utility, regulated for the
                    greater good of all, made to function according to an optimum.”1 Such
                    is power in the age of bourgeois modernity—what Foucault calls “power
                    without the king.”2 Jo’s dirty hands—nodes of bourgeois power—cut off
                    the head of the Queen who rules over him.
                            Discipline and The History have transformed Victorian literary and
                    cultural studies in fundamental ways. But far less influential have
                    been the lectures Foucault delivered at the Collège de France between
                    the publications of these two canonical works. Translated and pub-
                    lished as Society Must Be Defended, Foucault’s lectures argue that modern
                    forms of power (so central to the arguments of Discipline and The
                    History) are closely related to the reinvention of war by historians of
                    the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The historical imagination
                    of Europe’s emergent civil societies saw war not as a violent conflict
                    but as the most extreme form of power, as “force-relations laid bare.”3
                    For historians like Augustin Thierry, François Guizot, and
                    Montlossier, war is “the motor behind institutions and order. In the
                    smallest of its cogs, peace is waging a secret war . . . we have to interpret
                    the war that is going on beneath peace, peace itself is a coded war” (50–
                    1) Because war rages beneath social and political institutions, it func-
                    tions less as a conflict and more like an analytic, offering “a field of vis-
                    ibility” into the relations of force that divide and animate civic life
                    (242). War is a “way of speaking,” that “formulates,” “enumerates,”
                    and “deciphers truth” about a “certain historico-political divide”
                    between antagonistic races (70, 71, 72, 77). Not races in the epidermal
                    or biological sense, but as two peoples or social units bound antagonis-
                    tically to each other: “A binary structure runs through society . . . There
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001249

                                                                                                                        WAR         943
              are two groups, two categories of individuals, or two armies, and they
              are opposed to each other” (51). Seen in this light, the history of
              nations looks more and more like the history of race struggles within
              them, where Normans and Saxons, Franks and Gauls (and in a later
              iteration of this discourse, bourgeois and proletariat) have been irrec-
              oncilably linked by a silent war for centuries.
                      Foucault’s genealogy of war and nationalism recasts two norms of
              Victorian literary and cultural studies: that the English nation crystalized
              as a form of political community in the early nineteenth century, and
              that the Victorian epoch was an “age of equipoise.” Because of its plas-
              ticity and commitment to illuminating the asymmetrical workings of
              power, race war discourse was particularly useful in the early Victorian
              decades as an analytic of class division. Friedrich Engels sees
              England’s industrial towns as engulfed in a “social war” where “every
              man’s house [is] in a state of siege, everywhere reciprocal plundering
              under the protection of the law.”4 The Manifesto of the Communist Party
              (1848) and Capital (1867) both speak of capitalist modernity as a “veiled
              civil war.”5 Far from the observations of those on the Left, liberals and
              conservatives also turned to race war as an analytic of class. In his ethnog-
              raphy of London’s working classes, Henry Mayhew characterizes the
              poor as a parasitic race that preys on the urban bourgeoisie. Gaskell’s
              North and South (1855) demonstrates that far more pernicious than the
              cultural differences between the industrial North and pastoral South
              are the “battles” that have been fought between factory owners and
              unionized workers.6 Benjamin Disraeli’s Sybil, or, The Two Nations
              (1845) renders class differences in exclusively racial terms, describing
              a latent civil war between “two nations,” the “Norman” aristocracy and
              a “Saxon” peasantry. In each of these cases, war is not an event but
              an analytic for understanding power in industrial modernity. Foucault
              helps us see how Victorian England was born split, dualistic, and
              enveloped in war.
                      After the mid-century, however, Victorian texts shift away from the
              optics of race war.7 For Foucault, this is because the state transforms
              from an instrument of warfare into an end in itself: “the essential element
              is no longer the relationship of domination that exists between one
              nation and another or one group and another; the fundamental relation-
              ship is the State” (“Society” 236). Bleak House, in fact, registers this shift.
              Reading Dickens’s novel alongside Foucault’s genealogy of war allows
              us to look away from Jo’s abjectness towards the spotlessness of Sir
              Leicester Dedlock. Dedlock is paralyzed by Mr. Rouncewell, the son of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001249

                    944          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    a Dedlock servant and a factory owner in the North who has been invited
                    into Parliament. For Dedlock, inclusion of the “Ironmaster” into the state
                    apparatus signals how “some odd thousand conspirators, swarthy and
                    grim, who were in the habit of turning out by torchlight, two or three
                    nights a week, for unlawful purposes” have colonized the state apparatus.8
                    According to the gouty aristocrat, England’s violent class struggles can
                    now continue by the other means of the bourgeois state. Here, the
                    state is not an instrument of war, but a final battleground whose capture
                    would mean the universalization of class interests—the end to the epoch
                    of race war. It is no wonder that Dedlock sees this as the end of English
                    society.
                                                                            NOTES
                    1. Charles Dickens, Bleak House (London: Penguin, 1996), 734; Michel
                          Foucault, The History of Sexuality, volume 1: An Introduction, trans.
                          Robert Hurley (New York: Pantheon Books, 1978), 24.
                    2. Foucault, The History of Sexuality, 91.
                    3. Michel Foucault, “Society Must Be Defended,” trans. David Macey and ed.
                          Mauro Bertani and Alessandro Fontana (New York: Picador, 2003),
                          46. Subsequent citations appear parenthetically in the text.
                    4. Friedrich Engels, Conditions of the Working-Class in England (Oxford:
                          Oxford University Press, 2009), 37.
                    5. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Marx-Engels Reader, 2nd ed., ed.
                          Robert Tucker (New York: W. W. Norton, 1978), 474; Karl Marx,
                          Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Vol. 1, trans. Ben Fowkes
                          (New York: Vintage, 1977), 412–13.
                    6. Elizabeth Gaskell, North and South (London: Penguin Classics, 1996),
                          84.
                    7. This is not to say that war disappears from the Victorian imagination.
                          Nathan Hensley looks at how the countless imperial wars of the nine-
                          teenth century were integral to the formal innovations of the
                          Victorian literature. See Nathan K. Hensley, Forms of Empire: The
                          Poetics of Victorian Sovereignty (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016).
                    8. Dickens, Bleak House, 107.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001249

