                                                                                                                        WAR         945
              War
              CORNELIA PEARSALL
              V      ICTORIANS enjoyed a few months of peace, here or there.
                     Otherwise, theirs was a nation and a period constantly at war,
              defined traditionally as declared armed conflict between nations or
              states, a contest to persuade, or overwhelm, by force. Factoring in less tra-
              ditionally defined but nevertheless organized collective hostile engage-
              ments in defense or pursuance of Britain’s perceived interests, one
              would strain in scanning the full stretch of the Victorian timeline to
              spot the days when arms were laid down. This fact merits our keener
              attention because in a sense attention and more particularly its lack is
              a crucial feature of Victorian war awareness, and our own. My concern
              here is less with specific battle scares or scars than with the social and cul-
              tural impact of what I would term war abstractedness: war was what hap-
              pened while most Victorians were busy making other plans.
              Unquestionably, war flared into acute public awareness at numerous
              flashpoints throughout the period—phenomena often well-studied—
              but we have attended insufficiently to a broad-based Victorian abstracted-
              ness regarding war; that is, to a kind of disregarding of war, a cognitive
              and affective inattentiveness or absence to its ever-presence.
              Maintaining this steady lack of focus on or indeed gaze away from war
              required energies, I would argue, akin to those expended in its waging.
                      Concurrent with whatever other Victorian subjects occupy our atten-
              tion, war was essentially always being waged. What are the implications for
              its literature and culture, indeed for every aspect of its social being, for a
              nation to be almost continuously at war, somewhere or another, some-
              how or another? To see Victorian war steadily and see it whole would
              be to see not only the powerful impact of war in the abstract but to see
              the forms abstractedness takes. Complex and shifting literary and visual
              kinds; beautifully weighted conversations and densely freighted composi-
              tions; meaningful gestures, pregnant pauses, killing looks: whatever their
              temporal or spatial dimensions, these and innumerable other represen-
              tational practices take place and shape in wartime. Most appear
              abstracted from that fact; without recognition, no reckoning.
                      It is not news that wars for territory and sovereignty, forwarding
              instrumental and ideological aims, were frequent and wide-spread—
              indeed they often constituted the news, trooping through numerous dai-
              lies and periodicals, as our archival databases easily demonstrate with
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001250

                    946          VL C      •    VO L. 46, N O. 3/4
                    the flick of a finger. Queen Victoria’s reign began with a brief
                    Anglo-American kerfuffle near Niagara Falls and the more consequential
                    advent of the First Afghan War and ended in the bloody thick of the Boer
                    War. In between, the sun never set on British skirmishes, some conflicts
                    germinating further conflicts, others sprouting fresh. War demarcates for-
                    mally from other modes of violence, although its many derivations
                    include sexual assault, genocide, and other instantiations of brutality,
                    whether systemic, spontaneous, or symbolic: imperial and colonial aggres-
                    sion and defense, annexations, attacks, defeats, escalations, expeditions,
                    invasions, slaughters, suppressions, repulsions, retreats, victories, lives
                    given, lives taken. Although it is critical when considering Victorian war
                    to distinguish among specific conflicts, regions, and persons, as well as
                    ecologies damaged and cultural productions spawned—what war destroys
                    and what it generates—my point here is to ask what happens when we
                    track not only the implications of the iterativeness and unendingness of
                    war for this culture in the abstract, but its abstractedness from this fact.
                    Attention to a generalized inattention may help account for a tremendous
                    range of cultural and social manifestations of unease and anxiety, vulner-
                    ability and precariousness, apprehension and alarm.
                            Given war’s enormities, what could possibly cause our own distrac-
                    tion in attending to it? Perhaps whatever it is that makes it challenging
                    to hold our own unceasing war-waging in sustained and unflinching, or
                    even flinching, recognition. Essentially always at war and, despite excep-
                    tional moments of societal apprehension, only sometimes somewhat
                    aware of it: Victorian Britain in this regard, and disregard, bears resem-
                    blance to contemporary America. Even a cursory glance at historical cau-
                    sation will suggest that this consonance is in consequence, as numerous
                    current global situations of destabilization and devastation were set in
                    motion by Victorian aggression and interference. Localized causes and
                    consequences demand keen attention, as do the cumulative effects on
                    this culture of being at war more or less all the time. Bearing war in
                    mind can in turn illuminate texts and contexts seemingly unrelated to
                    it, recalling to us that Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyre and Christina
                    Rossetti’s “Goblin Market” were written in wartime no less than Alfred
                    Tennyson’s “The Charge of the Light Brigade,” however distinctive
                    each war and differentiated its wider recognition.
                            It is a far war, geographically and historically, that Matthew Arnold
                    has in mind in “Dover Beach,” but its representation at once dramatizes
                    and counters Victorian war abstractedness. The poem opens with a
                    speaker summoning his “love” to the window, to breathe in the sweet
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001250

                                                                                                                        WAR         947
              night air of the English coast and reflect with him on Sophocles and other
              matters. As Victorianists will recall (the poem’s canonicity is itself rele-
              vant), after realizing that a world that had seemed wondrous is “really”
              without “certitude,” “peace,” nor “help for pain,” the speaker concludes,
                      And we are here as on a darkling plain
                      Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight,
                      Where ignorant armies clash by night.1
               Alluding to Thucydides’ account in History of the Peloponnesian War of a
              night battle at Epipolae, where ally cannot be distinguished from
              enemy, the poet acknowledges the impossibility of remove from military
              conflict. Whatever else this pair may be doing—standing, speaking, breath-
              ing—they simultaneously plunge through the fog of war, struggling with
              ignorance not only in battle but, more, of battle. Published in Arnold’s
              1867 New Poems, “Dover Beach” was likely first drafted sometime between
              1848–52, during which years British armies were engaged in the Eighth
              Xhosa War in the Cape Colony, the Battle of Chillianwala during the
              Second Anglo-Sikh War, and the Second Anglo-Burmese War in Lower
              Burma, while at home many civilians actively prepared for a French inva-
              sion of the English coast. The poem charges a historical battlefield rather
              than, whatever their geographic distance from or nearness to Dover, these
              more temporally proximate conflicts. The simile heralded by “As” (as if
              “on a darkling plain”), announces this abstracted relation to war, a looking
              away from what the speaker claims to see. And yet, for all the distancing
              enabled by metaphor, the lovers’ presence in war’s present is entire:
              “And we are here.” An extraordinarily consequential reckoning for so sim-
              ple a declarative: “And” and “we” signifying formal and affective inclusion;
              “are” establishing the temporal present; “here” affirming spatial presence
              on an inescapable battlefield. We should recognize Victorian war abstract-
              edness in the presence of more or less perpetual wartime because we
              share it, clashing ignorantly on that darkling plain: And we are here, too.
                                                                       NOTE
              1. Matthew Arnold, “Dover Beach,” in The Poems of Matthew Arnold, ed.
                   Kenneth Allott (London: Longmans, 1965), 242–43.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Univ of Michigan Law Library, on 25 Sep 2018 at 20:50:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1060150318001250

